(UPDATED: On 4/27/15 at 4 p.m. ET with confirmation that Jon Jones now faces a felony hit-and-run charge.)

A 25-year-old woman sent to the hospital following a hit-and-run that allegedly involved UFC light-heavyweight champion Jon Jones suffered a serious injury, a representative for the Albuquerque (N.M.) police department told MMAjunkie.

Police spokesperson Tanner Tixier said the woman, who remains unidentified, was initially taken to an area hospital as a precautionary measure. However, after a medical exam, police confirmed the woman suffered a broken arm. Tixier initially was unable to provide further details on the injury, though he confirmed the woman’s pregnancy was not affected.

Now, Albuquerque police need a judge to sign off on an arrest warrant for the 27-year-old fighter, Tixier said. The fighter is being sought on suspicion of felony hit-and-run, which carries a maximum penalty of three years in jail and fines. Previously, he was facing a potential misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year in jail.

Prior to the update on the injured driver, police sought Jones for questioning after multiple witnesses, including an off-duty officer, spotted a man running from the scene of Sunday morning’s incident. Witnesses saw the man, believed to be Jones, turn back and grab a “handful of cash” before again fleeing the scene.

Police found a marijuana pipe with marijuana inside it upon searching a silver Buick SUV that Jones allegedly was driving.

Jones has been named in five traffic incidents since 2008.

In an Instagram video posted April 5, Jones said he was in the final stages of buying a new Corvette and claimed he had “matured” since a 2012 accident in which he crashed his Bentley into a utility pole.

Currently, Jones (21-1 MMA, 15-1 UFC), the top-ranked fighter in the USA TODAY Sports/MMAjunkie MMA pound-for-pound rankings, is scheduled to fight Anthony Johnson (19-4 MMA, 10-4 UFC) in next month’s UFC 187 pay-per-view headliner, which takes place May 23 in Las Vegas.

The UFC recently released a statement stating officials are “gathering facts and will reserve further comment until more information is available,” but made no mention of Jones possibly being pulled from the card.

Also see:

For the latest on UFC 187, stay tuned to the UFC Rumors section of the site.