Tropical Storm Cindy pushes ashore in southern Louisiana, largely spares Houston area Tropical storm warning lifted for Harris and other local counties

Debris sits on Texas 87 after Tropical Storm Cindy made landfall on June 22, 2017 on the Bolivar Peninsula. Debris sits on Texas 87 after Tropical Storm Cindy made landfall on June 22, 2017 on the Bolivar Peninsula. Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Staff / Houston Chronicle Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Staff / Houston Chronicle Image 1 of / 67 Caption Close Tropical Storm Cindy pushes ashore in southern Louisiana, largely spares Houston area 1 / 67 Back to Gallery

Taking a last-minute veer to the east and sparing much of the Houston area, Tropical Storm Cindy made landfall about 4 a.m. Thursday in southwestern Louisiana, according to the National Weather Service.

Harris County officials said Thursday morning that Cindy was, for the most part, "no different than a wet day" in Houston.

"For most people this morning there isn't any reason not to do what you're going to do this morning," said Jeff Lindner, a meteorologist with the county's flood control district.

The storm was moving toward the north at about 12 mph. Maximum sustained winds had decreased to about 40 mph.

Tropical storm warnings for Liberty, Harris, Galveston and Chambers counties were lifted about 5 a.m., the weather service reported.

1 DEAD: Boy killed by debris in TS Cindy storm surge

Forecasters expect the storm to continue weakening during the next 48 hours, with Cindy expected to weaken to a tropical depression later today, the NWS said. One person was reported killed - a child struck by debris pushed in by a wave in Alabama.

Harris County officials said they were winding down the emergency response to Tropical Storm Cindy.

"For us it's going to be another day at 9 a.m.," said Francisco Sanchez, spokesman for the Harris County Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Management.

Sanchez said the region has dodged "any significant impact." No flooding, casualties, or significant complications had been reported.

Sanchez said he expects to see about three inches of rain spread out over the course of Thursday, not enough to create any flooding problems, outside of some street flooding.

For the rest of the week, there may be some rain heading into the weekend, Sanchez said, that officials are monitoring. He said the region is settling into a regular summer pattern of afternoon thunderstorms.

Cindy's glancing blow left much of the Houston metro soggy overnight, but no worse for wear.

Most locations within the Beltway received less than a half inch of rain, according to the Harris County Flood Warning System. Areas closer to the gulf, like Nassau Bay (1.76 inches overnight) and Clear Lake (1.66 inches) weathered slightly higher totals. But to the far north and west, in areas like Katy (0.04 inches) and Cypress Creek (.08 inches overnight), Tropical Storm Cindy felt like any other mid-June overnight shower.

Almost all main traffic arteries in Harris and surrounding counties remained unaffected by high water. The few exceptions were portions of Highway 87/Broadway in Galveston County near Bauer Street and Herbert Street, as well as Highway 275 at 14th Street in Galveston County.

Centerpoint reported no significant outages due to Cindy.

About one to two inches of rain fell overnight in the Houston area, largely in the south and southeast portions of Harris County, according to Lindner.

He urged people to remain cautious during the morning commute and to watch for wet roads, but said the area had escaped serious consequences.

Lindner said while rain bands throughout the day could drop another one to two inches during the day Thursday, by evening, Cindy will likely have moved on to Arkansas. It is not a storm that will "linger," he said.

Winds coming in from the north, combined with low tide, were actually pushing tides down along Galveston Bay. Lindner said tides were rising on the backside of Galveston Island because of winds coming from the north.

In Galveston, steady rains came down for just a few hours overnight but the weather let up before daybreak.

Revelers determined to enjoy their night stayed out till the wee hours, some dipping into pools and pumping music as the storm approached. At one point, stormy skies obscured the ocean and the lights of oil rigs on the horizon, but by 5 a.m. the rain had passed and twinkling lights were visible again on the horizon.

"It wasn't nothing," said Kyle Martin, who has lived on the island about four years, adding, "I think we were lucky we didn't get hit with the east side of it."

In Galveston County, the storm's biggest effects were road debris and flooding. There were no reported injuries and no evacuees arrived at the Red Cross shelter set up at the Crystal Beach fire station. The only reported power outage lasted just under 30 minutes, and the ferry service kept running all through the night.

"Nothing unanticipated," said Garret Foskit, the county's emergency management coordinator. "The weather service did a pretty good job of nailing this."

In the eastern part of the county, Bolivar bore more of the storm's wrath.

"We got a lot more rain because it was closer to the center of the tropical storm," Foskit said. "It got an inch and a half to two more than the rest of the county. The wind was higher there - 50 to 60 mph gusts. On the mainland side it was 30 to 40 miles per hour.

"It was definitely a much more significant impact there."

One of the usual problem areas, by the intersection of State Highway 87 and Texas 124, became impassable due to storm debris.

"We're just waiting for daylight to start clearing the roads," Foskit said just before 6 a.m.

In the aftermath of what one surfer referred to as the "alleged" storm, Galveston wave-lovers were not impressed.

Jon Lewis, 29, a lifelong surfer from Friendswood, said the storm was "kinda disappointing."

Usually, the best surfing is just before or just after the storm, he said. But Thursday morning's waves didn't look so good, according to fellow surfer Joey Horn, 51.

"It's not very good today," he said. "I almost turned around and went back to work."

SHRIMP BOAT RESCUE: Coast Guard helps fishing boat in danger

In Liberty County, authorities breathed a sigh of relief.

"We're in good shape over here," LC Sheriff's Capt. Ken DeFoor said.

"It was a big to-do over nothing. It didn't affect us at all," he said.

Brazoria County saw limited flooding on low-lying roads off of Bluewater Highway, the sheriff's office reported. No damage has been reported, Lt. Varon Snelgrov said.

Fort Bend County also reported no damage.

A tropical storm warning was in place late Wednesday from San Luis Pass on the southern end of Galveston Island to the Florida Panhandle, with landfall expected at Sabine Pass at the Texas-Louisiana border.

But a last-minute shift pushed the storm ashore near Cameron, Louisiana.Some coastal areas along southeast Texas already have seen an impact, with Galveston experiencing gusts of wind exceeding 40 mph. Tree limbs were down in some coastal areas and isolated power outages were experienced.

Power outages knocked out service to about 800 homes and businesses about 7:45 p.m. in Galveston, though service was quickly restored.

Winds caused flight delays at Bush Intercontinental Airport late Wednesday but none was reported early Thursday.

The 10-year-old boy killed in Alabama was vacationing from the St. Louis, Missouri area, according to the Baldwin County Sheriff's Office. The boy had been walking outside a condo and was standing only a few feet from the door when a large wave pushed a log into the child.

Efforts to resuscitate him were unsuccessful and he was pronounced dead at the scene.