GETTY ISIS suspects behind the possible massacre were arrested on Sunday in France

The seven men have also been linked to the smashed jihadist cell behind the foiled Euro 2016 terror plot, French counter-terrorism officials have revealed. Shocking detail has emerged about the jihadi ring, with one discovered to have worked for a primary school in Strasbourg. Two automatic pistols and a huge stash of ammunition were found during the police raid at his home, along with documents – possibly by ISIS – calling for “martyrdom”, police officials said.

Out of the seven terror suspects currently being held in police custody, at least six were unknown to intelligence services until last week, and only three had a criminal record. And not one was on the French government’s official terrorist ‘S’ watch list. Two are said to be extremists who returned to Europe following a stint in Syria, where they are believed to have joined the ranks of ISIS. The two ‘returnees’ are said to have driven to the Turkish-Syrian border via Cyprus, but, because they travelled to Syria by car using less policed routes, their comings and goings did not attract the attention of authorities.

The fight against ISIS Fri, November 18, 2016 The battle against ISIS militants (also abbreviated as Daesh, ISIL, IS and Islamic State) continues in the Middle East. Play slideshow Getty 1 of 183 Forces battle against ISIS

In an investigation which spanned eight months, the seven terrorists were duped by French counter-terror officials who infiltrated their cell by posing as arms dealers, the French daily Le Monde reports. Following months of negotiations with the suspected terrorists, the undercover officers led the men to a bogus weapons cache in Val-d’Oise, a northern suburb of Paris, which had been fitted with surveillance cameras.

GETTY A primary school teacher was among the suspects

The radical Islamists, who, according to Le Monde, were “determined” to launch a series of attacks on French soil and were being “pressured” by ISIS to act “as soon as possible”, let their guard down, which is when they were spotted heading to the arms cache by undercover police officers last week. Two Frenchmen were among those arrested in the eastern city of Strasbourg, along with a French-Tunisian and a French-Moroccan. A 29-year-old Afghan was arrested in the southern city of Marseille, along with a 36-year-old Moroccan based in Portugal. The identity of the third man arrested in Marseille remains unknown. Some 43 suspected terrorists have been arrested in France since the start of November, French counter-terror officials said.

GETTY It is thought one of the members of the jihadi ring worked in a Strasbourg school

Five radicalised youths – aged 16 to 23, including an 18-year-old female - were arrested in Marseille last week, as well as a 21-year-old ISIS recruiter. They are also thought to have been planning an imminent attack, the French daily La Provence reports.

GETTY The young woman was 'addicted to jihadi websites'