Biden told gamers their colleagues had 'very constructive ideas.' Video game industry defends itself

The video game industry, desperate to distance itself from the National Rifle Association’s rebukes, met with Vice President Joe Biden on Friday to defend its work and avoid a federal crackdown.

“The vice president opened a thoughtful dialogue today, and we look forward to continuing that dialogue with the administration and industry partners,” GameStop, a major video game company that participated in the meeting, said in a statement.

Story Continued Below

( PHOTOS: 10 violent video games)

The vice president concluded his week with the gamers, following an unproductive talk Thursday morning with the NRA and an uncertain chat Thursday night with television and film groups. Friday’s meeting included video game lobbyists, manufacturers and researchers who study the effects of media on children.

The talks, which sparked a round of debate within the industry itself, have thrown gamers back on the defensive. Eager to avoid governmental regulation, companies are casting themselves as the scapegoat, not the instigator.

Video games and violence resurfaced after the NRA blamed shooter games for the recent massacre of 20 students and six adults at a Connecticut elementary school. The shooter, Adam Lanza, appeared to enjoy playing them.

“We know that there is no silver bullet, no seat belt,” Biden said before starting Friday’s meeting.

He told gamers their colleagues had “very constructive ideas” that could help and called the NRA chat “straightforward and productive.” He refused to elaborate.

The groups disagreed on how to present themselves leading up to the meeting. Some considered attendance akin to guilt. Others insisted on the value of speaking out publicly.

“Whether for good or for ill, games become instruments in public debate rather than as mechanisms through which players can participate in a variety of activities — including reflecting on the very debates they now serve as puppets,” said Ian Bogost, a Georgia Tech professor and founding partner of Persuasive Games, in an Atlantic article published Friday.

Bogost encouraged the industry to reinforce the various uses of video games, from educational tools to developmental assistants.

The International Game Developers Association, in a letter to Biden’s gun task force, instead pointed to research that indicates violent games “release stress and aggression.”

Members of the Entertainment Consumers Association asked the vice president to “support the public’s constitutional right to access and buy games, and to not blame media, including video games, for the recent tragedy that has befallen the nation.”