Gregory Campbell is ready to move on. The Boston Bruins center told reporters following practice at TD Garden that it's a "realistic possibility" he could play in Thursday's preaseason game against the Detroit Red Wings.

Campbell is recovering from a broken right leg, which he suffered while blocking an Evgeni Malkin slapshot in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals. He's been dealing with minor discomfort due to a surgically inserted screw in his right foot. Trainers have to stuff the right amount of foam into Campbell's skate to alleviate it.

Him and center Patrice Bergeron have been doing one-on-one battle drills while the rest of the team is doing their own drills at the other end of the ice.

Bergeron is progressing as well from his slew of injuries suffered during the Stanley Cup Final. They included a broken rib, torn cartilage, separated shoulder and punctured lung.

The 28-year-old remains optimistic that he'll see game action before the start of the regular season. Bergeron, Campbell and defenseman Zdeno Chara are the only players who have been sidelined for preaseason games.

JERSEY TUCK FORBIDDEN: The NHL has implemented a new rule, which forbids players from tucking in their jersey into the back of their pants. Rule 9.5 states that "players are not permitted to tuck their jersey into their pants in such a manner where the top padding of the pant and/or additional body protection (affixed to the pant or affixed to the Player's body) is exposed outside the jersey. The back uniform number must not be covered or obstructed in any fashion by protruding pads or other protective padding."

Players are going to have to get used to it too. A warning is issued for the first offense. If the player doesn't comply, a minor penalty will be assessed.

Bergeron, who naturally tucks in his jersey, doesn't understand the new rule.

"I don't see how that really affects other players," Bergeron told CSNNE.com. "But I'm just going to have to go with it, I guess."

SVEDBERG STRONG: Bruins goalie Niklas Svedberg had a strong showing in his preseason debut Tuesday night in a 3-2 shootout win over the Washington Capitals at Baltimore Arena.

Svedberg split time with Tuukka Rask and stopped 12 of 13 shots he faced during regulation and overtime. He was 6 for 8 in the shootout to help the Bruins improve their preseason mark to 2-0.

The Swedish netminder is competing with Chad Johnson for the backup job. Johnson has a rough outing in his preseason debut allowing three goals on eight shots in a 6-3 win over the Montreal Canadiens Monday at the Bell Centre.