SHARE Click image for enlarge.

By of the

Wisconsin ranked 42 out of the 50 states in private-sector job creation, according to the latest available government jobs data deemed credible by economists.

The data, which covers the 12 months from June 2011 to June 2012, shows that Wisconsin's position worsened from a rank of 37 in the previous period from March 2011 to March 2012.

Tuesday's report drew attention to a chronic concern that has preoccupied economists, politicians, business and civic leaders for years: Why is Wisconsin a slow-growth state?

"This is a big question," said Timothy Sheehy, president of the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce.

The Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, as the report is formally known, is based on reports from 96% of the nation's public and private sector employers, making it the most thorough and accurate reading of hiring in America. But the census data comes with a time lag of as long as seven months, which means it gets less attention than monthly unemployment reports.

The monthly data is based on a sample of little more than 3% of employers, which is extrapolated and prone to wide distortions. At the national level, the margin of error is relatively small. But Wisconsin's state job numbers come with a margin of error that can vary by more than 9,000 jobs in either direction in any given month - which means that initial reports of job gains can turn negative when final revisions are released.

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, which collects the data, uses the Quarterly Census to make final revisions to the monthly data.

The latest quarterly figures coincide with the run-up to the June 2012 recall election in Wisconsin, which resulted in Gov. Scott Walker defeating Democrat Tom Barrett. That election was fought primarily on issues of economic management and job creation. The governor's No. 1 campaign promise was that the state would create 250,000 private-sector jobs by the end of his four-year term.

During the recall campaign, Walker highlighted the quarterly data to discredit the monthly numbers, which at the time had reflected poorly on his first year in office. Since then, Walker has pre-released the Wisconsin census data each quarter, in advance of the national release. As reported previously, it shows that Wisconsin gained 35,381 private-sector jobs in the 12 months through June 2012.

But Wisconsin's pre-release does not show how the state compares to the remainder of the nation.

In the latest June-to-June data, the state with the greatest job creation is North Dakota, where economists say oil fields have attracted migrant workers. It showed a 12.1% increase in private-sector hiring.

Wisconsin's 35,381 private-sector jobs amount to a 1.5% increase. The Badger State trails other Midwest manufacturing states: Indiana and Michigan (both 2.9%); Ohio (2.6%); Iowa (2.0%); Minnesota (1.8%); and Illinois (1.6%).

Issues are complex

Tuesday's report is hardly the first to show that Wisconsin's economy has a subpar ranking when it comes to job creation. Many experts agree that the issues are complex and multifaceted.

Many note that Wisconsin ties Indiana as national leaders in the share of the workforce employed in manufacturing, leaving the state vulnerable to low-wage competition from Asia. And when modern manufacturing industries add production, it often involves a handful of skilled programmers who can operate automated equipment to carry out the same production that scores of low-skilled workers did in the pre-automation era.

States such as Michigan and Ohio, which saw their automakers devastated in the last recession, are able to rebound off a very low base, which improves the percentage increase in those numbers, notes Richard Longworth, a senior fellow at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs who specializes in the economics of the American Midwest.

Wisconsin, by contrast, doesn't rank as an automaking state, he said. Wisconsin's unemployment rate of 6.7% is well below the national average of 7.7%, reflecting how other states are rebuilding off weaker foundations.

It's not entirely a bad thing that Wisconsin is not in the same league as Michigan or Ohio, Sheehy said.

"On a metro basis, I'm not sure I'd trade places with Detroit or Cleveland. That's not the basis of comparison I'd want Milwaukee in."

Among other reasons for the malaise, some cite the state's relatively high tax rates. And Wisconsin has the reputation for lacking the culture of innovation, risk and venture capital that fosters "creative destruction" - the rise of new industries to replace dying ones, Longworth said.

But nearly all agree that Wisconsin struggles to close its "skills gap" - the inability to fill thousands of job openings for lack of qualified or willing candidates. Although the issue has been debated for years, Wisconsin appears to lack the workforce training opportunities that match workers with skills. The Jobs Center of Wisconsin, an employment exchange operated by the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development and meant to link job seekers with employers, currently lists 35,330 job openings in Wisconsin at a time when tens of thousands continue to look for work.

"It's what we call the workforce paradox," said James Golembeski, executive director of the Bay Area Workforce Development Board in Green Bay. "We seem to be short the workers with the skills we need."

Broken out by private-sector manufacturing jobs, Wisconsin ranks 20th in terms of job creation. Its increase of 11,788 new production jobs, for a gain of 2.6%, means Wisconsin trails Michigan (5.2% or 26,774); Indiana (4.3% or 20,298); and Ohio (3.9% or 24,648).