Weekend events in Toronto is our guide to events happening this Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Here's what's happening in Toronto this July 12-14, 2013.

FESTIVAL

Salsa on St. Clair

St. Clair will be shutdown from Christie to Winona for the annual Salsa on St. Clair Festival, which brings out street eats, dancing in the streets, and some series crowds to an area once categorized as a disaster zone by our municipal leader(s). The event id decidedly family-oriented throughout the day, but tends to get more lively when the sun sets.

July 13-14, 12pm-11pm

MARKET

Toronto Flower Market

Ontario flower and plant growers set up stalls at 99 Sudbury for the return of the Toronto Flower Market. One of Toronto's best new markets to pop-up on summer weekends, this event supports local growers whose product come from farms in the GTA and even residential yards. The market operates until 3PM on Saturday only with the best picks going early.

99 Sudbury (99 Sudbury Street), July 13, 2013, 10AM Free

White House Market Sale

White House Art Studio has organized its first artisan market, doubling as a studio fundraiser, this Sunday. Selling wall art, jewelry, zines and more, this sale offers a peak at what the Kensington art circle is busy creating when not battling big box giants. The secret space will be open to the public to explore and shop this Sunday only.

White House Studio (277.5 Augusta Avenue), July 14, 2013, 11AM Free

FOOD

Night It Up

Asian cuisine will be running the night in Markham this weekend with the opening of Night It Up in the Markham Civic Centre on Friday. Sample traditional dishes and twists on culinary treats from across the continent as created by local chefs and Asian restauranteurs while enjoying free outdoor film screenings and dance and musical performances. The event is being held to support Second Harvest, which supplies underprivileged Torontonians with nutritious meals. Try everything you can but be warned that there will be stinky tofu in the vicinity.

Markham Civic Centre (101 Town Centre Boulevard), July 12-14, 2013, 7PM Free

Pizza In The Pits Tree Tour

The Christie Pits neighbourhood becomes a tourist destination this Friday night with LEAF hosting ecology tours about what the community is doing to better the park life. As part of the David Suzuki Foundation's Homegrown National Park Project, representatives from LEAF, David Suzuki Foundation, Friends of Christie Pits and the Christie Pits Residents Association will gather to discuss the improvements and shortcomings of the local environment. Following the tour, attendees will end at the second Homegrown Pizza in the Pits night at the wood-burning oven in Christie Pits. Learn with LEAF and then eat

Christie Pits (750 Bloor Street West), July 12, 2013, 5:30PM $5 suggested donation

For more food events, check out our Toronto food events post.

MUSIC

Sound In Motion Festival

Sound In Motion got underway last night, but continues through the weekend with a variety of electronic-themed concerts, panels and film screenings. This is one of the biggest events of the year for electronic music fans in Toronto, and even features a show at what is a rarely used venue — Coronation Park. For a full rundown of what's on offer this year, checkout or preview post linked to above.

Various venues, July 11-13, $50 for a full festival pass

TD Irie Music Festival

This long-running festival celebrates the arts of many cultures, including music, dance, virual works, spoken word and culinary. Taking place in Mississauga's Celebration Square this weekend--with further events happening in Nathan Phillips Square next weekend--TD Irie Music Festival celebrates reggae, salsa, soul and African music with dance of the African diaspora. For the full schedule of events and performances, visit iriemusicfestival.com.

Celebration Square (301 Burnhamthorpe Drive), July 13-14, 2013, 2PM Free

SoundClash Festival

Harboufront festivals typically have a cheesy element to them but SoundClash nails it. A free music festival taking place on the WestJet Stage all weekend long, SoundClash features key performances by Brooklyn synthpop duo Chairlift on Friday night and local indie rock band Born Ruffians on Saturday. Keep an eye out for the SoundClash Music Award to see performances by bands like GROUNDERS and Program competing for a $10,000 prize.

Harbourfront Centre (235 Queen's Quay West), July 12-14, 2013, 9:30PM Free

For more music events, check out our This Week in Music and July Concerts posts.

CAR RACING

Honda Indy

Hear that sound? That'd be the the Indy cars doing practice laps along the Lake Shore in preparation for this weekend's Honday Indy. Car racing isn't for everyone, but the spectacle of it all is something to behold, and the feats these drivers can pull off is nothing short of remarkable. In conjunction with the main race, there's also a craft beer fest and food trucks and other vendors.

Exhibition Place, July 13-14. $35-165

FILM

Christie Pits Film Festival

So, last Sunday's Christie Pits film screening didn't exactly work out, did it? The Christie Pits Film Festival instead celebrates the premiere this Sunday with the aptly-named film Gimme Shelter. Screening in the pit near Bloor West, this documentary follows the Rolling Stones on their 1969 American tour, including their disastrous appearance at the Altamont Free Festival. The festival opens with a screening of a short film by local filmmaker Dan Browne. BYOBlanket!

Christie Pits Park (750 Bloor Street West), July 14, 2013, 9:15PM Free

Freestyle: The Art of Rhyme

Freestyle hip-hop is immortalized in Freestyle: The Art of Rhyme, Kevin Fitzgerald's 2000 documentary. Screening at Big Picture Cinema this Friday night, the film features interviews with important rappers like Mos Def, Ghostface Killah, KRS-One and Talib Kweli as well as archival footage of musical icons as the director traces the social consciousness the genre has created. The screening will be preempted with live performances as this is a one-time engagement at Big Picture. Tickets are available at the door and through guestlistapp.com.

Big Picture Cinema (1035 Gerrard Street East), July 12, 2013, 8:30PM $10

For more film events, check out our This Week in Film post.

ART

Toronto Graffiti Tour

Tour Guys take you on a two-hour expedition through Toronto's laneways and alleys to discover and learn about local graffiti. A surprisingly educational experience, these art guides will not only discuss the history and controversy of graffiti but the styles and best places in the city to find works. The tours will be taking place every Saturday throughout the summer. Book your tour through Uniiverse.com.

Queen Street West (310 Queen Street West), July 13, 2013, 3PM $30

THEATRE

Thrill Me: The Leopold and Loeb Story

Thrill Me: The Leopold and Loeb Story is a two-man musical set in 1920s Chicago where two teenagers fall into trouble and begin committing crimes that lead up to the 1924 murder of Bobby Franks. A twisted and manipulative relationship between two friends, the story is based on the true events that made international headlines. Performances begin this Friday night and continue through to the 27th at Red Sandcastle Theatre. Tickets are available at the theatre box office and online.

Red Sandcastle Theatre (922 Queen Street East), July 12-27, 2013, 8PM $25

Have an event you'd like to plug? Submit your own listing to the blogTO Toronto events calendar or contact us directly.

Photo of Salsa on St. Clair by Scott Snider