This. Burger. Is. Amazing. Words cannot actually describe the deliciousness of this recipe. This is the kind of gourmet burger you would order at some crazy fancy restaurant and only dream of replicating.

Seriously though. If you need to make something spectacular for your next BBQ to knock the socks off of your company, MAKE THESE! They will be singing your name in sweet praises for the rest of time. Now there is definitely a kick to these burgers, but my husband and I (who both are whips when it comes to heat) thoroughly enjoyed these burgers. The creaminess of the cream cheese cools them down a bit and all the other components work together to make each bite heavenly.

The Raspberry Chipotle sauce is phenomenal. It tastes hotter when it is actually hot off the stove top. Don’t let that scare you. It initially scared me, but after a mouthful of this burger, it was PERFECT!

My husband declared this a “hubby favorite”. So there you have that. What a man pleasing (and also woman pleasing) recipe for the BBQ… this is it. Don’t let the list of ingredients intimidate you… its actually easier than it seems and completely worth the extra steps, I promise! If you don’t already have a 4th of July menu planned for this weekend, put this on the menu.





5.0 from 1 reviews Creamy Jalapeño Stuffed Burgers with Raspberry Chipotle Sauce Print This burger could easily be the best burger you ever eat! They have a kick to them and taste phenomenal! Author: Nikki Recipe type: Dinner Serves: 6 Ingredients Burgers 2.5 lbs. ground beef

8 oz. cream cheese, softened

2 Tablespoons diced jalapeno

1 cup chopped bacon Raspberry Chipotle Sauce 2 Tablespoons oil

2 Tablespoons diced jalapenos

2 Tablespoons minced garlic

3 cups fresh raspberries, rinsed

½ cup cider vinegar

½ teaspoon salt

¼ cup brown sugar

½ cup sugar

¼ cup honey

2 teaspoons chipotle seasoning

2 Tablespoons cornstarch (optional)

4 Tablespoons cold water (optional) Onion Rings oil to fry

2 large onions, thinly sliced and separated into rings

1½ cups panko crumbs

1 egg, beaten Remaining ingredients 6 large hamburger buns

Lettuce

6 slices pepper jack cheese Instructions Burgers Mix cream cheese, jalapenos, and bacon in small bowl. Separate ground beef into 6 sections. Divide each section in half and flatten them with the palm of your hands. Add ⅙ of the cream cheese mixture to the center of one of the halves, then place the other half over the cream cheese mixture and seal the sides. Do this for each patty and girl on medium heat for about 5-7 min. per side or until done and completely cooked through. You can also place the pepper jack cheese on top of the burgers to allow it to melt. Raspberry Chipotle Sauce Heat oil in sauce pan. Add jalapenos and garlic. Saute for 1 minute. Add the rest of the ingredients and bring to a boil. Simmer on low for about 15 minutes or until it thickens to the desired consistency. I like mine a little thicker so I combine 2 Tablespoons of cornstarch with 4 Tablespoons of cold water and add to simmering sauce and cook for another 2 min. Once thickened, remove from heat and set aside. Onion Rings Heat oil to 360 degrees. Dip onions in the beaten egg and then in the panko crumbs. Fry in oil until the first side is golden brown in color then flip and do the other side until golden brown. Remove from heat and set on a paper towel. To assemble burgers Place lettuce on the bottom half of the bun. Lay the burger on top of the lettuce. Place the pepper jack cheese on top of the burger unless you already melted it over the top. Next add the Raspberry Chipotle Sauce then onion rings. Top it with the top of the bun. 3.2.2708

Share This Post

Tweet



Email



Enjoy!