A month after the German Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger was elected pope in the Sistine Chapel, on April 19, 2005, the US Embassy to the Vatican sent a cable to the State Department in Washington providing its first readings on what the United States and the world at large should expect from the new head of the Roman Catholic Church.

Pope Benedict XVI had been one of the closest associates of his predecessor, Pope John Paul II. According to America's local Vatican watchers, it was "unthinkable" that he would at all deviate from the former's strict stances regarding ethical issues, such as abortion, euthanasia, contraception, cloning or homosexuality.

The profile drawn up by the embassy noted that the new pope had no political experience and that, owing to his age, he couldn't afford the luxury of acquiring it. But US diplomats in the Vatican could not complain about being underemployed. During the last 10 years, they've sent a total of 729 cables back to the State Department.

Sometimes, they merely tried to explain to the State Department how the Vatican functioned -- and in reports that depict a very curious world, indeed. According to a dispatch from 2009, although the church was "highly hierarchical," it was also chaotic. Likewise, it was usually the case that "only a handful of experts are aware of imminent decisions" and they normally just acquiesce to whatever their boss decides. If fact, the report continued, hardly anyone ever dared to criticize the pope or to deliver bad news to him. It was rare to find independent-minded advisers, they wrote.

Communication in 'Coded Language'

The Vatican's innermost circle is almost exclusively made up of Italian men in their 70s. The Americans wryly note that "most of the top ranks of the Vatican ... do not understand modern media and new information technologies," and that "many officials do not even have official email accounts." They also note how the Cardinal Secretary of State, the name given to the Holy See's equivalent of a prime minister, doesn't even speak English and was also considered a "yes man."

Those closest to the pope communicate among themselves "in 'coded' language that no-one outside their tight circles can decipher." The American diplomats joke, for example, about how the Israeli ambassador recently received a message from the Vatican that reportedly included something positive about his country. But since the message was written in such impenetrable language, the ambassador "missed it, even when told it was there."

Washington also seems to be particularly interested in the Roman Curia, the administrative apparatus of the Vatican, and its policies toward the Asia states it is currently at loggerheads with, including North Korea, Burma, Vietnam and, in particular, China. In a cable classified "secret" from Dec. 7, 2009, the embassy provides a detailed report on the activities of Caritas Internationalis, the confederation of Catholic aid organizations under Vatican control, in countries such as China, North Korea and Burma.

Working Quietly in China and North Korea

The regimes in these countries tolerate the work of Caritas within their borders, at least periodically, because they need the assistance. Even in North Korea, the organization quietly carries on with its charity work, which includes administering two Vatican-financed hospitals.

The US Embassy devoted a whole series of reports to the Vatican's relationship with China. Relations are reportedly very sensitive because there are two Catholic churches competing with each other in the People's Republic. On the one hand, there is the "patriotic" church supported by the communist regime. And, on the other, there is the underground church that is still loyal to Rome and is now tolerated by Beijing following years of persecution.

According to a senior Caritas official, the organization works with both churches. The Chinese government is aware of this, the official added, but the authorities still just "look the other way" whenever Caritas workers cooperate with members of the underground church.

Stonewalling the UN's Top Prosecutor

Thanks to its good ties to high-ranking Vatican officials, the US Embassy was able to provide an early and detailed warning to diplomatic headquarters back in Washington about a looming scandal involving Carla del Ponte, the Swiss woman who was then the chief UN war crimes prosecutor at The Hague.

In August 2005, del Ponte made a personal appearance at the Vatican to ask the Roman Curia to help in the apprehension of Ante Gotovina, a former Croatian general, who was being sought by The Hague for war crimes. Though he is still celebrated in Croatia as a hero, Gotovina is believed to have been responsible for atrocities against ethnic Serb civilians as part of an August 1995 offensive during the civil war that attended the breakup of Yugoslavia. Del Ponte told her hosts that Gotovina was hiding out in a Franciscan monastery in Croatia -- and accused the church of protecting him.

Del Ponte, however, was brushed off by Archbishop Giovanni Lajolo, the Vatican's foreign minister at the time. Outraged, del Ponte said that the Curia "refuses totally to cooperate with us." She claimed never to have received a response to a letter she sent to Pope Benedict XVI. Moreover, it would appear that the negative sentiments went both ways: Already on August 22, the head of the Vatican division responsible for overseeing Balkan affairs complained to the US Embassy about del Ponte's "very undiplomatic" behavior. In a cable the diplomats sent home soon thereafter, they reported on the "very ugly impression" del Ponte had made on the Vatican.

Originals: The Key Vatican Cables Click on the headlines below to read the full texts... Feb. 20, 2009 -- Vatican: "the holy see: a failure to communicate" XXXXXX: Redacted by the editors. Important note on the dispatches...



<<193115>>



2/20/2009 16:00



09VATICAN28



Embassy Vatican



CONFIDENTIAL



09VATICAN25



P 201600Z FEB 09



FM AMEMBASSY VATICAN



TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1055



INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE



USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY



USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY



AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY



AMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITY



AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY



AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY



AMEMBASSY VATICAN



TAGS: PREL, ECPS, PHUM, PGOV, KPAO, KIRF, VT



SUBJECT: THE HOLY SEE: A FAILURE TO COMMUNICATE



REF: VATICAN 25 AND PREVIOUS (NOTAL)



C o n f i d e n t i a l vatican 000028



E.o. 12958: decl: 2/20/2029



Tags: prel, ecps, phum, pgov, kpao, kirf, vt



Subject: the holy see: a failure to communicate



Ref: vatican 25 and previous (notal)



CLASSIFIED BY: Julieta Valls Noyes, CDA, EXEC, State.



REASON: 1.4 (b)



1. (C) Summary: Together with other flaps, the recent global



controversy over the lifted excommunication of a Holocaust



denying bishop (reftel) exposed a major disconnect between Pope



Benedict XVI's stated intentions and the way in which his



message is received by the wider world. There are many causes



for this communication gap: the challenge of governing a



hierarchical yet decentralized organization, leadership



weaknesses at the top, and an undervaluing of (and ignorance



about) 21st century communications. These factors have led to



muddled, reactive messaging that reduces the volume of the moral



megaphone the Vatican uses to advance its objectives. This is



especially true with audiences whose view of the Vatican is



informed largely by mass media coverage. There are signs that



at least some in the Vatican have learned their lessons and will



work to reshape the Holy See's communications structure.



Whether they'll prevail remains to be seen. End Summary.



A centralized hierarchy making decentralized decisions



--------------------------------------------- ---------



2. (SBU) The Vatican is highly hierarchical with the Pope



ultimately responsible for all important matters. Yet it is



also highly decentralized in its decision-making. This



structure reflects belief in the principle of "subsidiarity":



leaving decisions to those closest to, and best informed on, a



particular matter. On a practical level, however, subsidiarity



can limit horizontal communication by eliminating peer



consultation and review. This approach also encourages a narrow



focus on issues at the expense of the big picture.



3. (C) In discussing the recent crisis with CDA and PAO,



Archbishop Claudio Celli, President of the Pontifical Council



for Social Communications, described the Church's current



communication style as being focused on the content of a



decision, rather than its public impact. xxxxxxxxxxxx, noted that this phenomenon is compounded



by the fact that officials from the various Church organs see



themselves as advocates for their issues, without considering



their impact on the Church as a whole. The result is a process



in which only a handful of experts are aware of imminent



decisions -- even major decisions with broad implications -- and



those who are become proponents, rather than impartial advisors



to the Pope.



4. (C) A series of missteps during Benedict's Papacy have made



the lack of information-sharing in the Church painfully clear.



In 2006, the Pope made a speech in Regensburg that was widely



decried as insulting to Muslims, though he later explained he



had no such intent. In 2008, the Pope himself baptized (i.e.,



converted)a prominent Muslim during the 2008 Easter Vigil



service at St. Peters, an event broadcast worldwide; the



Cardinal who runs Inter-Faith Dialogues for the Church knew



nothing about the conversion until it happened. This year,



Father Federico Lombardi, head of the Vatican press office, and



Cardinal Walter Kasper, President of the Pontifical Council for



Promoting Christian Unity, which includes relations with Jews,



learned only after the fact about the decision to reinstate



communion with schismatic Lefebrvist bishops who included a



Holocaust denier (reftel). In the midst of that scandal,



meanwhile, the Pope proposed promoting to auxiliary bishop a



priest who said Hurricane Katrina was "divine retribution" for



licentiousness in New Orleans. The resulting outcry led the



cleric to decline the offer.



A tin ear at the top



--------------------



5. (C) These public missteps have intensified scrutiny of the



small group of decision-makers advising the Pope. Normally



reserved Vatican commentators have directed withering criticism



their way. George Weigel, editor of a conservative US-based



Catholic monthly, recently wrote that "curial chaos, confusion,



and incompetence" had made clear "how dysfunctional the curia



remains in terms of both crisis analysis and crisis management."



Secretary of State Tarcisio Bertone -- who is tasked with



managing the Curia and is its highest ranking official after the



Pope -- has been a particular target. xxxxxxxxxxxx, said Cardinal Bertone had "distinguished



himself by his absence" during the Lefebrvist controversy, and



that the curia had become "more disorganized than before" under



his leadership. Yet xxxxxxxxxxxxmay have understated the problem.



At the height of the Lefebrvist scandal, Bertone referred



publicly to the offending bishop by the wrong name, then



denounced the media for "inventing" a problem where there was



none. Other critics note Bertone's lack of diplomatic



experience (he speaks only Italian, for example), and a personal



style that elevates "pastoral" work -- with frequent foreign



travel focusing on the spiritual needs of Catholics around the



world -- over foreign policy and management.



6. (C) More broadly, critics point to a lack of generational or



geographical diversity in the Pope's inner circle. Most of the



top ranks of the Vatican -- all men, generally in their



seventies -- do not understand modern media and new information



technologies. The blackberry-using Father Lombardi remains an



anomaly in a culture in which many officials do not even have



official email accounts. xxxxxxxxxxxx (strictly protect)



laid even greater emphasis on the Italo-centric nature of the



Pope's closest advisors. Other than Archbishop James Harvey, an



American and head of the Papal household, there is no one from



an Anglophone country in the Pope's inner circle. xxxxxxxxxxxx few had exposure to the



American -- or, indeed, global -- rough and tumble of media



communications. The Pope's Italian advisors, xxxxxxxxxxxx, tend



towards old-fashioned, inwardly focused communications written



in "coded" language that no-one outside their tight circles can



decipher. (The Israeli Ambassador, for example, told CDA that



he recently received a Vatican statement that was supposed to



contain a positive message for Israel, but it was so veiled he



missed it, even when told it was there.)



7. (C) There is also the question of who, if anyone, brings



dissenting views to the Pope's attention. As noted, Cardinal



Bertone is considered a "yes man," and other Cardinals don't



hold much sway with the Pope -- or lack the confidence to bring



him bad news. And if bad news rarely filters out, leaks never



spring. xxxxxxxxxxxx said that under Pope John Paul II leaks



were much more common. While damaging, these leaks did allow



time for critics of pending decisions to mobilize and present



opposing views to the Pope in time. Pope Benedict and Cardinal



Bertone run a much tighter ship, xxxxxxxxxxxx, but at the expense of



squashing coordination or allow dissenting voices to be heard.



Not spin city



-------------



8. (C) As has become evident throughout the controversies, much



of the Vatican hierarchy greatly undervalues external



communication. Structurally, the Pontifical Council for Social



Communications and the Vatican Press Office are weak. The



former applies the Church's teachings to the field of



communications and is not involved in shaping the Pope's



message. The latter has the writ, but not the influence.



9. (C) Father Lombardi, the spokesman, is not part of the Pope's



inner circle. He has little influence over major decisions,



even when he knows about them beforehand. And the poor man is



terribly overworked: Lombardi is simultaneously the head of the



Vatican Press Office, Vatican Radio (which broadcasts in 45



languages), and the Vatican Television Center, literally moving



from one office to the other over the course of the day. It's a



grueling schedule on good days, and debilitating during crises.



Father Lombardi is the deliverer, rather than a shaper, of the



message. In the wake of the Lefebrvist controversy, he openly



said that the Vatican press office "didn't control the



communication." Without a comprehensive communication strategy



in which he plays a central role, he is dependent on individual



Church organs and leaders seeking his advice. It's a hit or



miss proposition.



10. (C) There is another cost to divorcing decision-making from



public spin: the Church's message is often unclear. xxxxxxxxxxxx



candidly said that the Holy See rarely considered how best



to explain dogmatic, ecclesiastical, moral or other decisions to



a broader public. He emphasized that the content of the message



should not/not be different -- the Catholic Church would often



take positions contrary to public opinion -- but the Church



hierarchy needed to think more about how to present positions.



Cracking the real da vinci code?



--------------------------------



11. (C) The communication culture of the broader Catholic Church



is diverse, however, with many Church-affiliated organizations



now excelling at communication. One example of a Church



organization that is using modern communications strategies to



deliver its message, interestingly enough, is Opus Dei. (Pope



John Paul II was widely perceived as being more adept at public



communications than Benedict; his communications director,



Joaquin Navarro Valls, famously belongs to Opus Dei.) CDA and



PolOff recently met with xxxxxxxxxxxx, and discussed how Opus Dei



responded to the "Da Vinci Code" - a novel which pilloried the



group. Sanchez said that Opus Dei realized it could respond in



one of three ways: (1) ignore the controversy; (2) adopt a `no



prisoners' approach and refute every error; or (3) treat the



controversy as a chance to explain Opus Dei to the world. Opus



Dei chose the third option, holding regular briefings for



journalists and others, and the organization's membership has



actually increased as a result.



Fixing what's lost in translation



---------------------------------



12. (C) There is a growing urgency within the Vatican about the



need to change the current communication culture. The rare



public criticisms offered by Father Lombardi and Cardinal Kasper



of their colleagues' roles in the Lefebrvist scandal are an



extremely strong indicator of internal disquiet. There are a



number of proposals circulating to help fix the problem.



xxxxxxxxxxxx have confirmed privately to



the Embassy that discussions are underway about having the



Pontifical Council for Social Communications assume a greater



coordinating role on major decisions. Father Lombardi has



privately proposed to his leadership the possibility of creating



an office in the Secretariat of State to flag potentially



controversial decisions and has asked for resources to prepare



translations of major statements more quickly. Other Vatican



insiders close to the Pope have suggested bringing more native



English speakers into positions in the Pope's inner circle. And



not a few voices are calling for Cardinal Bertone's removal from



his current position.



Comment



-------



13. (C) Behind closed doors, our Vatican contacts seems to be



talking about nothing but the need for better internal



coordination on decisions and planned public messages. Most



Church leaders recoil at the notion that they could be seen as



anti-Semitic or endorsing Holocaust denials, yet are confronting



the ugly reality that many people actually believe these notions



because of their own poor communications culture. But if or



when change will come remains an open question. The structural



and cultural roots of the current situation are deep, and will



not be easily uprooted as they are closely connected to Pope



Benedict's governing style. Similar criticism after the



disastrous Regensburg speech led to little or no change. The



percolating discussions regarding the creation of a policy



coordinating body within the curia - and other possible



solutions -- are hopeful signs. But they are not yet guarantees



that change is coming. Stay tuned. End Comment.



Noyes <<193115>>2/20/2009 16:0009VATICAN28Embassy VaticanCONFIDENTIAL09VATICAN25P 201600Z FEB 09FM AMEMBASSY VATICANTO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1055INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUSMISSION GENEVA PRIORITYUSMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITYAMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITYAMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITYAMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITYAMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITYAMEMBASSY VATICANTAGS: PREL, ECPS, PHUM, PGOV, KPAO, KIRF, VTSUBJECT: THE HOLY SEE: A FAILURE TO COMMUNICATEREF: VATICAN 25 AND PREVIOUS (NOTAL)C o n f i d e n t i a l vatican 000028E.o. 12958: decl: 2/20/2029Tags: prel, ecps, phum, pgov, kpao, kirf, vtSubject: the holy see: a failure to communicateRef: vatican 25 and previous (notal)CLASSIFIED BY: Julieta Valls Noyes, CDA, EXEC, State.REASON: 1.4 (b)1. (C) Summary: Together with other flaps, the recent globalcontroversy over the lifted excommunication of a Holocaustdenying bishop (reftel) exposed a major disconnect between PopeBenedict XVI's stated intentions and the way in which hismessage is received by the wider world. There are many causesfor this communication gap: the challenge of governing ahierarchical yet decentralized organization, leadershipweaknesses at the top, and an undervaluing of (and ignoranceabout) 21st century communications. These factors have led tomuddled, reactive messaging that reduces the volume of the moralmegaphone the Vatican uses to advance its objectives. This isespecially true with audiences whose view of the Vatican isinformed largely by mass media coverage. There are signs thatat least some in the Vatican have learned their lessons and willwork to reshape the Holy See's communications structure.Whether they'll prevail remains to be seen. End Summary.A centralized hierarchy making decentralized decisions--------------------------------------------- ---------2. (SBU) The Vatican is highly hierarchical with the Popeultimately responsible for all important matters. Yet it isalso highly decentralized in its decision-making. Thisstructure reflects belief in the principle of "subsidiarity":leaving decisions to those closest to, and best informed on, aparticular matter. On a practical level, however, subsidiaritycan limit horizontal communication by eliminating peerconsultation and review. This approach also encourages a narrowfocus on issues at the expense of the big picture.3. (C) In discussing the recent crisis with CDA and PAO,Archbishop Claudio Celli, President of the Pontifical Councilfor Social Communications, described the Church's currentcommunication style as being focused on the content of adecision, rather than its public impact. xxxxxxxxxxxx, noted that this phenomenon is compoundedby the fact that officials from the various Church organs seethemselves as advocates for their issues, without consideringtheir impact on the Church as a whole. The result is a processin which only a handful of experts are aware of imminentdecisions -- even major decisions with broad implications -- andthose who are become proponents, rather than impartial advisorsto the Pope.4. (C) A series of missteps during Benedict's Papacy have madethe lack of information-sharing in the Church painfully clear.In 2006, the Pope made a speech in Regensburg that was widelydecried as insulting to Muslims, though he later explained hehad no such intent. In 2008, the Pope himself baptized (i.e.,converted)a prominent Muslim during the 2008 Easter Vigilservice at St. Peters, an event broadcast worldwide; theCardinal who runs Inter-Faith Dialogues for the Church knewnothing about the conversion until it happened. This year,Father Federico Lombardi, head of the Vatican press office, andCardinal Walter Kasper, President of the Pontifical Council forPromoting Christian Unity, which includes relations with Jews,learned only after the fact about the decision to reinstatecommunion with schismatic Lefebrvist bishops who included aHolocaust denier (reftel). In the midst of that scandal,meanwhile, the Pope proposed promoting to auxiliary bishop apriest who said Hurricane Katrina was "divine retribution" forlicentiousness in New Orleans. The resulting outcry led thecleric to decline the offer.A tin ear at the top--------------------5. (C) These public missteps have intensified scrutiny of thesmall group of decision-makers advising the Pope. Normallyreserved Vatican commentators have directed withering criticismtheir way. George Weigel, editor of a conservative US-basedCatholic monthly, recently wrote that "curial chaos, confusion,and incompetence" had made clear "how dysfunctional the curiaremains in terms of both crisis analysis and crisis management."Secretary of State Tarcisio Bertone -- who is tasked withmanaging the Curia and is its highest ranking official after thePope -- has been a particular target. xxxxxxxxxxxx, said Cardinal Bertone had "distinguishedhimself by his absence" during the Lefebrvist controversy, andthat the curia had become "more disorganized than before" underhis leadership. Yet xxxxxxxxxxxxmay have understated the problem.At the height of the Lefebrvist scandal, Bertone referredpublicly to the offending bishop by the wrong name, thendenounced the media for "inventing" a problem where there wasnone. Other critics note Bertone's lack of diplomaticexperience (he speaks only Italian, for example), and a personalstyle that elevates "pastoral" work -- with frequent foreigntravel focusing on the spiritual needs of Catholics around theworld -- over foreign policy and management.6. (C) More broadly, critics point to a lack of generational orgeographical diversity in the Pope's inner circle. Most of thetop ranks of the Vatican -- all men, generally in theirseventies -- do not understand modern media and new informationtechnologies. The blackberry-using Father Lombardi remains ananomaly in a culture in which many officials do not even haveofficial email accounts. xxxxxxxxxxxx (strictly protect)laid even greater emphasis on the Italo-centric nature of thePope's closest advisors. Other than Archbishop James Harvey, anAmerican and head of the Papal household, there is no one froman Anglophone country in the Pope's inner circle. xxxxxxxxxxxx few had exposure to theAmerican -- or, indeed, global -- rough and tumble of mediacommunications. The Pope's Italian advisors, xxxxxxxxxxxx, tendtowards old-fashioned, inwardly focused communications writtenin "coded" language that no-one outside their tight circles candecipher. (The Israeli Ambassador, for example, told CDA thathe recently received a Vatican statement that was supposed tocontain a positive message for Israel, but it was so veiled hemissed it, even when told it was there.)7. (C) There is also the question of who, if anyone, bringsdissenting views to the Pope's attention. As noted, CardinalBertone is considered a "yes man," and other Cardinals don'thold much sway with the Pope -- or lack the confidence to bringhim bad news. And if bad news rarely filters out, leaks neverspring. xxxxxxxxxxxx said that under Pope John Paul II leakswere much more common. While damaging, these leaks did allowtime for critics of pending decisions to mobilize and presentopposing views to the Pope in time. Pope Benedict and CardinalBertone run a much tighter ship, xxxxxxxxxxxx, but at the expense ofsquashing coordination or allow dissenting voices to be heard.Not spin city-------------8. (C) As has become evident throughout the controversies, muchof the Vatican hierarchy greatly undervalues externalcommunication. Structurally, the Pontifical Council for SocialCommunications and the Vatican Press Office are weak. Theformer applies the Church's teachings to the field ofcommunications and is not involved in shaping the Pope'smessage. The latter has the writ, but not the influence.9. (C) Father Lombardi, the spokesman, is not part of the Pope'sinner circle. He has little influence over major decisions,even when he knows about them beforehand. And the poor man isterribly overworked: Lombardi is simultaneously the head of theVatican Press Office, Vatican Radio (which broadcasts in 45languages), and the Vatican Television Center, literally movingfrom one office to the other over the course of the day. It's agrueling schedule on good days, and debilitating during crises.Father Lombardi is the deliverer, rather than a shaper, of themessage. In the wake of the Lefebrvist controversy, he openlysaid that the Vatican press office "didn't control thecommunication." Without a comprehensive communication strategyin which he plays a central role, he is dependent on individualChurch organs and leaders seeking his advice. It's a hit ormiss proposition.10. (C) There is another cost to divorcing decision-making frompublic spin: the Church's message is often unclear. xxxxxxxxxxxxcandidly said that the Holy See rarely considered how bestto explain dogmatic, ecclesiastical, moral or other decisions toa broader public. He emphasized that the content of the messageshould not/not be different -- the Catholic Church would oftentake positions contrary to public opinion -- but the Churchhierarchy needed to think more about how to present positions.Cracking the real da vinci code?--------------------------------11. (C) The communication culture of the broader Catholic Churchis diverse, however, with many Church-affiliated organizationsnow excelling at communication. One example of a Churchorganization that is using modern communications strategies todeliver its message, interestingly enough, is Opus Dei. (PopeJohn Paul II was widely perceived as being more adept at publiccommunications than Benedict; his communications director,Joaquin Navarro Valls, famously belongs to Opus Dei.) CDA andPolOff recently met with xxxxxxxxxxxx, and discussed how Opus Deiresponded to the "Da Vinci Code" - a novel which pilloried thegroup. Sanchez said that Opus Dei realized it could respond inone of three ways: (1) ignore the controversy; (2) adopt a `noprisoners' approach and refute every error; or (3) treat thecontroversy as a chance to explain Opus Dei to the world. OpusDei chose the third option, holding regular briefings forjournalists and others, and the organization's membership hasactually increased as a result.Fixing what's lost in translation---------------------------------12. (C) There is a growing urgency within the Vatican about theneed to change the current communication culture. The rarepublic criticisms offered by Father Lombardi and Cardinal Kasperof their colleagues' roles in the Lefebrvist scandal are anextremely strong indicator of internal disquiet. There are anumber of proposals circulating to help fix the problem.xxxxxxxxxxxx have confirmed privately tothe Embassy that discussions are underway about having thePontifical Council for Social Communications assume a greatercoordinating role on major decisions. Father Lombardi hasprivately proposed to his leadership the possibility of creatingan office in the Secretariat of State to flag potentiallycontroversial decisions and has asked for resources to preparetranslations of major statements more quickly. Other Vaticaninsiders close to the Pope have suggested bringing more nativeEnglish speakers into positions in the Pope's inner circle. Andnot a few voices are calling for Cardinal Bertone's removal fromhis current position.Comment-------13. (C) Behind closed doors, our Vatican contacts seems to betalking about nothing but the need for better internalcoordination on decisions and planned public messages. MostChurch leaders recoil at the notion that they could be seen asanti-Semitic or endorsing Holocaust denials, yet are confrontingthe ugly reality that many people actually believe these notionsbecause of their own poor communications culture. But if orwhen change will come remains an open question. The structuraland cultural roots of the current situation are deep, and willnot be easily uprooted as they are closely connected to PopeBenedict's governing style. Similar criticism after thedisastrous Regensburg speech led to little or no change. Thepercolating discussions regarding the creation of a policycoordinating body within the curia - and other possiblesolutions -- are hopeful signs. But they are not yet guaranteesthat change is coming. Stay tuned. End Comment.Noyes

The Curia justified its refusal to assist The Hague in its manhunt for Gotovina by pointing out that it was extremely unlikely that the former general would be hiding out in a Franciscan monastery. Nevertheless, a source from within the church acknowledged to the Americans that there had been ongoing tensions with the Franciscan monks -- though the members of the order still enjoy a very high degree of recognition for their heroic resistance of communist efforts to persecute Christians.

According to the high-ranking official, del Ponte was very aggressive when she demanded to have an audience with the pope. Even years later, the former prosecutor was still livid. In her memoirs, first published in 2008, del Ponte described how Archbishop Lajolo responded to her request: "Just come to Saint Peter's Square," Lajolo reportedly told her. He was referring, of course, to the general audience that the head of the Catholic Church holds there each Wednesday -- before tens of thousands of visitors.