With a new CBA done, it's time to ring in the season. Here is how each team shakes out in our preseason Major League Soccer Power Rankings.

1. New England Revolution

In starting the season without Jermaine Jones and possibly Lee Nguyen, the Rev's depth will be tested early, but in a weakened Eastern Conference New England should prevail.

2. Seattle Sounders

Can Ozzie Alonso recover from offseason groin surgery and get back to his midfield-destroying best? He'll need to for Seattle to break through and win MLS Cup this season. Keep an eye on the Brad Evans-as-center back experiment as well.

3. L.A. Galaxy

The post-Landon Donovan era begins for real on Friday night against Chicago. Finding a way to replicate the contributions of the departed Marcelo Sarvas -- at least until Steven Gerrard arrives -- could prove just as tough.

4. Sporting Kansas City

The return of Roger Espinoza should provide a spark to SKC's midfield, good thing since Kansas City has moved to the Western Conference. The pursuit of Hamburg's Rafael van der Vaart will make for interesting viewing.

5. Columbus Crew

The Crew are a trendy Supporters' Shield pick, with Kei Kamara expected to provide the finishing touch that was missing last year, but is Emanuel Pogatetz really the answer in the back?

6. Toronto FC

TFC doubled down in terms of big offseason acquisitions with Jozy Altidore and Sebastian Giovinco joining the side. But a less heralded acquisition in defender Damien Perquis will have a huge say in how far Toronto goes.

7. D.C. United

DCU will need to move on quickly from its midweek ousting in the CONCACAF Champions League. Bill Hamid is back in goal, but Fabian Espindola's six-game suspension will put more pressure on the newly arrived Jairo Arrieta.

8. Real Salt Lake

RSL will be one of the more interesting teams to watch in the early going. Mainstays like Chris Wingert and Nat Borchers are gone, but a more-than-respectable spine remains through Chris Schuler and Kyle Beckerman.

9. FC Dallas

Health is the watchword in Dallas, where it is hoped players like Mauro Diaz and Walker Zimmerman can hold up for an entire season. Is this year that Oscar Pareja finally gets his due as one of the league's top coaches?

10. Vancouver Whitecaps

The Whitecaps' midfield is as impressive as they come with Matias Laba, Gershon Koffie and Pedro Morales all impressing. Finishing from forwards has been an issue however. Newcomer Octavio Rivero is expected to solve that problem.

11. Houston Dynamo

For a team that didn't make the playoffs last year, Houston has a decent core, especially in midfield, where Brad Davis, Boniek Garcia and the underrated Luis Garrido should help the Dynamo bounce back from last season.

12. Portland Timbers

The good news is the Timbers' back line is probably the best manager Caleb Porter has ever assembled. The bad news is that injuries have cut deep into Portland's midfield depth. Jack Jewsbury and Gaston Fernandez will need to step up until Diego Valeri and Will Johnson recover from injuries.

13. New York Red Bulls

An offseason of discontent, including the firing of Mike Petke, is over at last. New arrivals Sacha Kljestan and Felipe Martins should bolster the midfield, but new manager Jesse Marsch will need Damien Perrinelle and Ronald Zubar to jell quickly.

14. Philadelphia Union

Philadelphia remains something of an enigma heading into the season. The Union have some impressive component parts in Maurice Edu, Andrew Wenger and Vincent Nogueira, but will the pieces fit together?

15. Chicago Fire

After setting a league record with 19 draws last year, Frank Yallop's revamped squad will try to convert more of those draws into wins. The keys will be in the back as well as the arrival of attacker Shaun Maloney.

16. Montreal Impact

The Impact's stunning progression into the semifinals of the CONCACAF Champions League has raised expectations, and it will be up to the likes of Justin Mapp and Ignacio Piatti to continue that early success.

17. Orlando City

The Citrus Bowl will be buzzing to the tune of over 60,000 rabid fans. Kaka should do fine, but is Brek Shea really a left back? Manager Adrian Heath sure hopes so.

18. New York City FC

Manager Jason Kreis has assembled some impressive attacking pieces in Mix Diskerud and David Villa, but the right side of his defense is unproven, as is Andrew Jacobson in the Kyle Beckerman role. It will likely take a while for Kreis to find the right balance in his team.

19. San Jose Earthquakes

A new stadium and the return of manager Dominic Kinnear will try to revive San Jose's fortunes. After an injury-hit 2014, attacking midfielder Matias Perez-Garcia is critical to San Jose's chances.

20. Colorado Rapids

The Rapids acquired some impressive midfield parts this offseason like Sam Cronin and Marcelo Sarvas, but questions abound in the back, where Shane O'Neill and Drew Moor are still recovering from injuries.

Jeff Carlisle covers MLS and the U.S. national team for ESPN FC. Follow him on Twitter @JeffreyCarlisle.