Recipe | Extra Australian Lamingtons

I was overseas for Australia Day so when my cousin made her first trip to Australia recently, I jumped at the chance to make an appropriately themed treat to welcome her! I immediately thought of lamingtons because I hadn't made them before and was keen to try and also, how could you go wrong with a chocolate covered cake?



To make it extra Australian, I decided to also try my hand at marbling for the first time and marble the inside with green and gold.



The lamingtons were a total hit at the welcome lunch and I think it definitely gave my cousin a good impression of what Australia has to offer!















Ingredients

125 grams butter, softened

1 1/3 cups caster sugar

1 tsp vanilla essence

3 eggs

1 3/4 cups self rising flour

1/2 cup milk

Yellow and Green food colouring

3 cups desiccated coconut

3 1/2 cups icing sugar

1/4 cocoa powder

1 tablespoon butter (for the icing)

1/2 cup boiling water





Note: This recipe requires preparation overnight

Directions

1. Using an electric mixer, beat together the butter, caster sugar and vanilla essence until well combined, should be light and fluffy. Beat in the eggs, one at a time. Beating each egg for a minute before adding the next.

2. Slowly sift in the flour, folding as you go.

3. Fold in the milk, and fold until well combined.

4. Pour mixture in a greased tray (I used a tray that was about 10cm by 25cm, and 4cm deep). On the top drip little droplets of green and yellow food colouring (not too many, maybe 6 little dots). Using a fork, gently fold through the food colouring to streak the batter with yellow and green.

5. Bake at 180 degrees Celcius for 25 minutes. Check if its cooked by inserting a skewer, if it comes out clean, its cooked!

6. Once the tray has been removed from the oven and has cooled, place on a wire tray and keep in a safe place overnight (I put it back in the oven once it had cooled)





7. Mix together the last four ingredients until well combined.

8. Cut the cake into a desirable shapes, I cut them into little squares and that yielded 25 lamingtons.

9. Pour half a cup of the desiccated coconut onto a plate (keep topping up the plate as you need).

10. Dip each square into the chocolate icing, drip off any excess then cover in coconut. Place on a wire tray to set.





What it looks like on the inside







