The basal-like subtype was discovered more than a decade ago by first-generation cDNA microarrays13. These tumours are often referred to as triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) because most basal-like tumours are typically negative for ER, PR and HER2. However, ∼75% of TNBCs are basal-like with the other 25% comprised of all other mRNA subtypes6. In this data set, there was a high degree of overlap between these two distinctions with 76 TNBCs, 81 basal-like, and 65 that were both TNBCs and basal-like. Given the known heterogeneity of TNBCs, and that the basal-like subtype proved to be distinct on every platform, we chose to use the basal-like distinction for comparative analyses.

Basal-like tumours showed a high frequency of TP53 mutations (80%)9, which when combined with inferred TP53 pathway activity suggests that loss of TP53 function occurs within most, if not all, basal-like cancers (Fig. 3b). In addition to loss of TP53, a MEMo analysis reconfirmed that loss of RB1 and BRCA1 are basal-like features (Fig. 4c)47,50. PIK3CA was the next most commonly mutated gene (∼9%); however, inferred PI(3)K pathway activity, whether from gene37,38,39, protein36, or high PI(3)K/AKT pathway activities, was highest in basal-like cancers (Fig. 3a). Alternative means of activating the PI(3)K pathway in basal-like cancers probably includes loss of PTEN and INPP4B and/or amplification of PIK3CA. A recent paper12 performed exome sequencing of 102 TNBCs. Five of the top six most frequent TNBC mutations in ref. 12 were also observed at a similar frequency in our TNBC subset (Myo3A not present here); of those five, three passed our test as a significantly mutated gene in TNBCs (Supplementary Table 2).

Expression features of basal-like tumours include a characteristic signature containing keratins 5, 6 and 17 and high expression of genes associated with cell proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 5). A PARADIGM33 analysis of basal-like versus luminal tumours emphasized the importance of hyperactivated FOXM1 as a transcriptional driver of this enhanced proliferation signature (Supplementary Fig. 17). PARADIGM also identified hyperactivated MYC and HIF1-α/ARNT network hubs as key regulatory features of basal-like cancers. Even though chromosome 8q24 is amplified across all subtypes (Supplementary Fig. 9), high MYC activation seems to be a basal-like characteristic51.

Given the striking contrasts between basal-like and luminal/HER2E subtypes, we performed a MEMo analysis on basal-like tumours alone. The top-scoring module included ATM mutations, BRCA1 and BRCA2 inactivation, RB1 loss and cyclin E1 amplification (Fig. 4c). Notably, these same modules were identified previously for serous ovarian cancers41. Furthermore, the basal-like (and TNBC) mutation spectrum was reminiscent of the spectrum seen in serous ovarian cancers52 with only one gene (that is, TP53) at >10% mutation frequency. To explore possible similarities between serous ovarian and the breast basal-like cancers, we performed a number of analyses comparing ovarian versus breast luminal, ovarian versus breast basal-like, and breast basal-like versus breast luminal cancers (Fig. 5). Comparing copy number landscapes, we observed several common features between ovarian and basal-like tumours including widespread genomic instability and common gains of 1q, 3q, 8q and 12p, and loss of 4q, 5q and 8p (Supplementary Fig. 20A). Using a more global copy number comparison, we examined the overall fraction of the genome altered and the overall copy number correlation of ovarian cancers versus each breast cancer mRNA subtype (Supplementary Fig. 20A, B); in both cases, basal-like tumours were the most similar to the serous ovarian carcinomas.

Figure 5: Comparison of breast and serous ovarian carcinomas. a, Significantly enriched genomic alterations identified by comparing basal-like or serous ovarian tumours to luminal cancers. b, Inter-sample correlations (yellow, positive) between gene transcription profiles of breast tumours (columns; TCGA data, arranged by subtype) and profiles of cancers from various tissues of origin (rows; external ‘TGEN expO’ data set, GSE2109) including ovarian cancers. Full size image Download PowerPoint slide

We systematically looked for other common features between serous ovarian and basal-like tumours when each was compared to luminal. We identified: (1) BRCA1 inactivation; (2) RB1 loss and cyclin E1 amplification; (3) high expression of AKT3; (4) MYC amplification and high expression; and (5) a high frequency of TP53 mutations (Fig. 5a). An additional supervised analysis of a large, external multitumour type transcriptomic data set (Gene Expression Omnibus accession GSE2109) was performed where each TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) breast tumour expression profile was compared via a correlation analysis to that of each tumour in the multitumour set. Basal-like breast cancers clearly showed high mRNA expression correlations with serous ovarian cancers, as well as with lung squamous carcinomas (Fig. 5b). A PARADIGM analysis that calculates whether a gene or pathway feature is both differentially activated in basal-like versus luminal cancers and has higher overall activity across the TCGA ovarian samples was performed; this identified comparably high pathway activity of the HIF1-α/ARNT, MYC and FOXM1 regulatory hubs in both ovarian and basal-like cancers (Supplementary Fig. 20C). The common findings of TP53, RB1 and BRCA1 loss, with MYC amplification, strongly suggest that these are shared driving events for basal-like and serous ovarian carcinogenesis. This suggests that common therapeutic approaches should be considered, which is supported by the activity of platinum analogues and taxanes in breast basal-like and serous ovarian cancers.

Given that most basal-like cancers are TNBCs, finding new drug targets for this group is critical. Unfortunately, the somatic mutation repertoire for basal-like breast cancers has not provided a common target aside from BRCA1 and BRCA2. Here we note that ∼20% of basal-like tumours had a germline (n = 12) and/or somatic (n = 8) BRCA1 or BRCA2 variant, which suggests that one in five basal-like patients might benefit from PARP inhibitors and/or platinum compounds53,54. The copy number landscape of basal-like cancers showed multiple amplifications and deletions, some of which may provide therapeutic targets (Supplementary Table 6). Potential targets include losses of PTEN and INPP4B, both of which have been shown to sensitize cell lines to PI(3)K pathway inhibitors55,56. Interestingly, many of the components of the PI(3)K and RAS–RAF–MEK pathway were amplified (but not typically mutated) in basal-like cancers including PIK3CA (49%), KRAS (32%), BRAF (30%) and EGFR (23%). Other RTKs that are plausible drug targets and amplified in some basal-like cancers include FGFR1, FGFR2, IGFR1, KIT, MET and PDGFRA. Finally, the PARADIGM identification of high HIF1-α/ARNT pathway activity suggests that these malignancies might be susceptible to angiogenesis inhibitors and/or bioreductive drugs that become activated under hypoxic conditions.