The Canadian Armed Forces are facing tough times. Canada’s military is being asked to do more and more despite falling or frozen budgets, curtailed training, units that are under-strength and aged equipment in urgent need of replacement. These challenges are perhaps most acutely faced by the Royal Canadian Navy, which is responsible for the world’s longest coastline and supporting allies abroad with a fleet that is on the verge of rusting out, if it has not already.

[np_storybar title=”John Ivison: $26B shock — Canada’s largest ever defence procurement handed off in sole-source contract” link=”http://news.nationalpost.com/2015/01/21/john-ivison-26b-shock-canadas-largest-ever-defence-procurement-handed-off-in-sole-source-contract/”%5DShow me a good loser and I’ll show you a loser. The old saying is doubly apt in defence procurement, where losing bidders always claim nepotism, corruption or incompetence.

But accusations that the government has sole sourced a military contract even larger than the one at the centre of the F35 fiasco may be more than just sour grapes on the part of those frozen out.

There was genuine shock in Ottawa defence circles when an apparently routine information session on the efforts to build a new warship fleet — Canada’s largest-ever defence procurement project — revealed, without fanfare, that Irving Shipbuilding in Halifax had been awarded the designation as prime contractor on the $26-billion procurement to build up to 15 ships.

Continue reading…



[/np_storybar]

The combination of mounting security concerns and tightened fiscal straits makes it critical that every last ounce of military capacity be wrung out of every defence dollar. There is no longer any room, if there ever was, for using money allocated to the armed forces to play politics. Yet when it comes to military procurement, especially, the evidence is that, as usual, security is taking a back seat to politics.

On Thursday, for instance, National Post columnist John Ivison reported that a major component of a $26 billion program to build new warships for the Royal Canadian Navy had been sole-sourced to Irving Shipyards of Halifax. The program will see up to 15 combat ships built for the Navy over 30 years. The Conservative government insists that Irving was always going to be the prime contractor for the project, and that recent announcements simply confirm this. Perhaps. But should Irving have been the prime contractor? Could other companies have assisted in the construction of our new vessels for less money? Without a competitive bidding process, we will never know.

The government tells us all is well (see Public Works Minister Diane Finley’s letter to the editor in Saturday’s edition). Yet this government, notwithstanding its pro-military stance, has a history of bungling procurement projects. Multi-year efforts to procure new logistics trucks for the Army have gone nowhere, as the government has proven unable even to properly solicit bids. Replacements for the Sea King helicopters, needed decades ago, are not yet in service.The fiasco surrounding the F-35 purchase, intended to replace our aging CF-18 jets, is well-known.

As recently as October, the government was dismissing warnings by the Parliamentary Budget Officer that the $3.1 billion budgeted to procure six to eight Offshore Patrol Ships for the Navy wouldn’t be enough. “We are confident that we will build six Arctic offshore patrol ships,” Ms. Finley said in the House of Commons. “The numbers provided by the PBO are based on erroneous data, rough cost estimates of international vessels with varied capabilities, and they’re derived using inaccurate specifications.”

Canadians need a military that can safeguard our security at home and honour our obligations abroad

Yet earlier this month, when a contract was finally signed — the vessels, due years ago, will now enter service in 2021 at the earliest — the budget had grown by $400 million, while the number of ships had shrunk to as few as five.

What can account for this? We refer again to Ms. Finley’s letter on Saturday. She writes: “We are committed to creating jobs, growth and long-term prosperity for Canadians. That’s why we are so proud that our Shipbuilding Strategy will end the shipbuilding boom-and-bust cycle while creating an estimated 15,000 jobs and resulting in over $2 billion in annual economic benefit for 30 years.”

Notice anything missing from that statement? In all that list of the many things to which the government is “committed,” there is not a single reference to getting ships for the Navy. Jobs here, “economic benefit” there, but no new destroyers in sight.

Politics is politics. But Canadians need a military that can safeguard our security at home and honour our obligations abroad. The Tories talk a good game, but when it counts, they seem more interested in buying votes than buying ships.

National Post