Pitchfork Music Festival 2015 is next week, taking place at Chicago's Union Park from July 17-19. This year's lineup features Wilco, Sleater-Kinney, Chance The Rapper, Jamie xx, Chvrches, Run The Jewels, Future Islands, Panda Bear, Ariel Pink, Mac DeMarco, A$AP Ferg, and many, many more. Tickets for Saturday and Sunday are sold out, but Friday passes are still available here for $65 each.

Now, we're happy to announce the schedule of the festival's official after-parties, which will be held at Lincoln Hall, Schubas, and Virgin Hotels Chicago.

On Thursday, July 16, the night before fest starts, Natalie Prass will play Schubas with In Tall Buildings.

Friday, July 17 brings two options: Tobias Jesso Jr. with Whitney at Schubas, or Vic Mensa on Virgin Hotels Chicago's 25th floor, with Stefan Ponce DJ'ing on the hotel's rooftop.

Boiler Room, Ray Ban, and iLoveMakonnen have also teamed up for SuperChef, where Lil B, Sonny Digital, DJ Green Lantern, Tunji Ige, Speakerfoxxx and Makonnen himself will present a collaborative project. You can RSVP here for the event, which goes down on Friday.

Three events are scheduled for July 18. Ariel Pink and Mr. Twin Sister will play Lincoln Hall, while Schubas hosts Protomartyr and Bully. Over at Virgin Hotels Chicago, Future Islands and Hit City U.S.A. will deliver DJ sets on the rooftop, while the Orwells and Ex Hex will perform on the 25th floor.

Closing out our after-parties the night of Sunday July 19 are How To Dress Well and Lower Dens at Lincoln Hall and Mourn with Star Tropics at Schubas. HAIM will DJ on the rooftop of Virgin Hotels Chicago, with a special guest performing on the hotel's 25th floor.

Advance tickets for the Lincoln Hall/Schubas shows, which are all 18+, are available here. A limited number of tickets to each show will be available at the door for a reduced price for those with Pitchfork Music Festival wristbands.

The events at Virgin Hotels Chicago are free with RSVP, but are 21+ and available in limited quantities.