20 Years of Luxembourg Studies at the University of Sheffield

University of Sheffield: Flagship Institution for Luxembourg Studies

Marking the 20th anniversary of the Centre for Luxembourg Studies, the colloquium held on 8 May 2015 attracted 80 people, including staff, students and members of the general public. Emeritus Deputy Vice Chancellor, Professor Paul White, provided words of welcome and underlined the important role of small countries in European and global affairs. It was a great honour that the Luxembourg Ambassador to the Court of St James’s, H.E. Mr Patrick Engelberg, opened the event and took part in discussions over the course of this special day.

Multilingual Encounters and ‘New Speakers’ of Luxembourgish

The programme showcased work by undergraduate Sheffield students as well as former and current Erasmus students from the University of Luxembourg (Gilles Genot and Hippolyte Weiland). Student poster presentations covered topics in sociolinguistics, migration studies, media studies, cultural studies, history and politics, with specific reference to Luxembourg. Michael Migliaccio created a video on Italian Migration to Luxembourg as part of his current Luxembourg Year Abroad Project.

Two PGR students, Joanna Kremer (Sheffield) and Annie Flore Made Mbe (Luxembourg) then presented findings on language testing and citizenship and family language policy in Luxembourg. The keynote speaker, Dr Kasper Juffermans (Luxembourg), provided the audience with insights on his current project (STAR), which focuses on the theme of crossing borders and is informed by the sociolinguistics of globalisation. Following the formal closing of the colloquium by Professor Penny Simons, participants enjoyed a traditional Luxembourgish wine reception, which was generously sponsored by Caves Ries.

Comments on the Event and Media Coverage

“I was surprised to see that there is so much exciting research being done on Luxembourg and Luxembourgish and impressed by the quality of the work done by Sheffield students!”

“I liked how multilingual the student group is. Quite impressive and surprising for the UK.”

“I learnt about the various directions one can go when researching Luxembourg (e.g. family language policy and official levels). The possibilities are endless!”

The Twitter feed from the event can be accessed by clicking #luxcolloq2015.

The colloquium was covered by Radio 100,7, the leading station in Luxembourg for in-depth coverage of current social, cultural and political topics. The radio spot includes interviews with Ben Courtenay, Lucy Tallentire and Maisie Tripp.

Following the event, Dr Horner took part in an in-depth interview with the Luxemburger Wort, the leading daily broadsheet newspaper in Luxembourg.

Tags: Luxembourg, University of Sheffield