Since 2011 the team have collaborated with four international museums regarding their colonial collections. They have subsequently identified some of the photographs across Australia. Since 2013 they have contacted Kimberley and Pilbara communities as well as met with some communities in the southwest region of Western Australia. The team intends to build on existing relationships to include the wider Australian context.

The photographs are also accessible via the website Returning Photos: Australian Aboriginal Photographs from European Collections which was launched in early 2016. Communities can use the tool to find out what family and traditional country photographs are being held in these overseas collections as well as make contact with the museums, get more information and obtain copies.

In some instances, clues such as the image location, dates and writing on the back of the photograph helped the team understand the context or identity of the person and their traditional country.

The team are amazed at being able to return these images back to communities who would not otherwise have had the opportunity to see their ancestors.

“I’ve had people in tears, they are so happy to see ancestors that they’ve never seen before.”

Ms Donna Oxenham

Photographs are also a very important part of our history and using information taken from these images, about Aboriginal people whose cultural information have been left out of historical records, will lead to new historical narratives and more accurate records.

This research has been supported by the Australian Research Council with two Discovery Project grants since 2011 as well as a Future Fellowship being awarded to Professor Jane Lydon. Several publications have also been published including a book, Calling the Shots which tells stories of reuniting families with these images and what this means to community.

There has also been international recognition of this research with Professor Jane Lydon winning an award in February 2016 for contribution to photography and anthropology from The Royal Anthropological Institute, London. In addition, she has been invited to speak at many forums worldwide; another sign that people are interested in this community engaged kind of research.

The processes used in this research are also transferable on an international scale. Institutions in Europe have looked to this Australian project of cultural heritage in how they manage their own indigenous collections. For example, Professor Lydon has been invited to advise and be part of a similar process with Norwegian colleagues in returning images of their indigenous Saami people.