Located in the Grand Ceremonial House of Disney’s Polynesian Resort is one of the best character dining experiences found on Disney property, the Best Friends Breakfast at ‘Ohana. At this character meal, you will feast on an American breakfast with Polynesian incluences. As you dine, some of your favorite Disney characters, including Lilo and Stitch, will stop by your table for autographs and pictures.The food alone at ‘Ohana is reason enough to add this breakfast to your must-do list.

When your family’s name is called, your “cousin” will escort you to your table while grabbing some delicious pineapple bread for you along the way. Once seated, you will be served POG juice. This wonderful blend of passionfruit, orange, and guava juice is some of the best I have ever tasted. The rest of your breakfast at ‘Ohana is served family style. Selections include Mickey waffles, Hawaiian pork sausages, scrambled eggs, smoked bacon, island-style fried potatoes, and fresh fruit. All of the food served at the Best Friends Breakfast is delicious and your “cousin” will gladly bring another bowl of anything you may want.

In addition to the fabulous food options at ‘Ohana, some of your favorite Disney characters will be joining your for breakfast. The Best Friends Breakfast is hosted by Lilo and Stitch. The other characters present at the breakfast can vary, but you will usually find characters such as Mickey and Pluto. As you dine, the characters will make their way from table to table stopping for autographs, pictures, and other funny antics. As if that’s not enough entertainment for one meal, your children can even join the characters in a parade around the restaurant!

The view from the restaurant is yet another great reason to make a reservation for breakfast at ‘Ohana. With giant windows lining the perimeter of the restaurant, you will be able to see lush tropical vegetation and the volcano from the Polynesian’s pool. ‘Ohana also provides a view of the Grand Floridian and Cinderella Castle across Seven Seas Lagoon. This unique second story view of the castle helps to add a little extra magic to your dining experience.

I highly recommend the Best Friends Breakfast at ‘Ohana for your next Walt Disney World vacation. The combination of great food, lovable characters, and a spectacular view makes this character dining experience one you won’t soon forget. Have you experienced breakfast at ‘Ohana? Let us know your favorite part of the experience in the comment below!

photo credit: Sam Howzit via photopin cc