ADT–The provider of security systems earned 55 cents per share, excluding certain items, for the fiscal third quarter. That was eight cents above estimates, with revenue also slightly above consensus. ADT saw an increase in average revenue per customer, as it ramps up its involvement in home automation and interactive services.

Pitney Bowes–The company matched Street estimates with second quarter profit of 46 cents per share, but revenue was above consensus and Pitney Bowes also raised its earnings forecast for the year. It credits expanding involvement in digital commerce in part for the improved forecast.

Garmin–The GPS receiver company reported second quarter profit of $1.02 per share, excluding certain items, swamping estimates of 76 cents. Revenue was also well above consensus, as is its 2014 earnings forecast. Garmin was helped by higher sales of its GPS fitness devices.



Sealed Air–Sealed Air earned 42 cents per share for the second quarter, three cents above estimates, while revenue was slightly above analyst forecasts. The maker of such products as Cryovac packaging systems and Bubble Wrap also raised its forecast for the year, thanks in part to a more favorable price mix.

Rockwell Automation–The maker of factory automation systems fell seven cents short of estimates with fiscal third quarter profit of $1.49 per share, excluding certain items. Revenue was also short, although Rockwell did see increased sales of motion control and industrial safety products compared to a year earlier.

American Express–Amex reported second quarter profit of $1.43 per share, five cents above estimates. Profit was nine percent higher than a year earlier, thanks to increased use of credit cards by Amex customers.

Panera Bread–Panera matched forecasts by earning $1.74 per share for the second quarter, excluding certain items, but the restaurant chain's revenue fell short of forecasts. Panera ended a long run of sales increases last fall, and is still experiencing what the company had referred to as "operational friction."

Amgen–The biotech giant reported second quarter profit of $2.37 per share, 30 cents above estimates, with revenue beating analyst forecasts as well. It also said it would cut up to 15 percent of its workforce and close plants in a move to reallocate its resources.

Buffalo Wild Wings–The company earned $1.25 per share for the second quarter, beating estimates by five cents, and its revenue was also above analyst forecasts. However, the restaurant chain's earnings forecast for the year is below Street expectations.

DreamWorks Animation–DreamWorks lost 18 cents per share for the second quarter, wider than the two cent loss Wall Street was expecting. Revenue also fell short of estimates, and the movie studio said the SEC is investigating its write-down of "Turbo," its poorly performing movie.

Express Scripts–Express Scripts beat estimates by one cent with second quarter profit of $1.23 per share, excluding certain items. Revenue came in above estimates as well for the pharmacy benefits manager.

Marriott–The hotel giant reported second quarter profit of 71 cents per share, excluding certain items, four cents above estimates. Revenue was slightly shy of forecasts, but Marriott did see stronger average daily room rates and an increase in revenue per available room.

U.S. Steel–The steel maker surprised the Street with a second quarter profit of 17 cents per share, excluding certain items, after analysts had expected a 29 cent per share loss. The company was helped in part by an increase in steel prices.

AstraZeneca–The drug maker will buy a portfolio of lung-related drugs from Spain's Almirall in a deal worth up to $2.1 billion.

General Motors–GM has been hit with a new lawsuit involving its faulty ignition switches, this one on behalf of more than 650 alleged victims.

Netflix–The streaming video company announced that it struck a deal back in May to pay AT&T for smoother delivery of its video streaming service.

—By CNBC's Peter Schacknow

Questions? Comments? Email us at marketinsider@cnbc.com