The parents of a British man who has been found after being missing for six years have been prevented from contacting him because of data protection laws.

The parents of a British man who has been found after being missing for six years have been prevented from contacting him because of data protection laws.

Family of missing man found after six years aren't allowed to know where he is

Matthew Green, 32, was last seen leaving his home in Kent in 2010, when he told his parents he was going to London to visit friends.

Now, his parents, Jim and Pauline, have been told by police their son has been found alive in Spain - but they are not allowed to get in touch with him.

They have been informed Matthew was taken in by Spanish social services worried by him "acting oddly". Without any photo ID on him, he instead gave two aliases and the name Matthew Green.

He was found to have a 99.9 per cent fingerprint match and Kent Police have since closed his missing persons case.

Pauline, 63, said in a Facebook post: "I have asked for a photo but due to Data Protection I am not allowed!! I have asked for a photo of his tattoos so that I am 100% sure it's him, but again that thing called Data Protection gets in the way.

"We are no way nearer to seeing him, talking to him or anything else, due to his human rights and Data Protection.

"I have written him a letter which I have emailed to the Foreign Embassy / Consulate in Madrid but they will not tell me if Matt is in receipt of my letter."

Mrs Green has made a plea on Facebook for people to share information and to contact her if they can help them make positive contact with their son.

In a statement, Kent Police said: "Kent Police has provided the family with information provided to them that the missing person had been found by authorities and his safety established.

"No further details are being provided to Kent Police in regards to his whereabouts due to the fact this would require the individual's consent, considering his right to a private life.

"Liaison can now continue between the family and the European authorities to establish what further information they are able to provide the family, in line with the individual's consent as an adult."

The Foreign Office told The Independent: "Our staff continue to provide support to the family of Matthew Green.

"We remain in close contact with the Spanish authorities for updates."

Online Editors