More than 11,300 people have signed up and are ready to go today to clean up the riot damage in Vancouver after the Canucks’ Stanley Cup defeat. “We will be good to go any time tomorrow,” organizer Smitty Smith posted late Wednesday night on the Post Riot Cleanup Facebook site coordinating the city-wide effort.

Jamie Dechamplain and her dog Becker were among the volunteers who pitched in to clean up Vancouver's Robson St. Thursday morning. ( PETTI FONG PHOTO )

Smith and fellow organizers were also using Twitter, at @vancouverclean, to rally buckets, mops and brooms. Social media jumped in quickly even as cars burned and rioters smashed windows to loot stores when the Canucks collapsed under the Boston Bruins 4-0 attack on the ice. “World: as you can imagine Vancouver is being embarrassed by a relative few,” wrote basketball star Steve Nash of Victoria, B.C., according to The Canadian Press.

Article Continued Below

“We're a great city and have a lot of class. Our team is great and our championship will come. Soon.” Also on Twitter, B.C. Premier Christy Clark begged rioters: “Let's not make things worse,” she said. “Time to go home.” Former B.C. premier and past Liberal MP Ujjal Dosanjh tweeted: “Shame! “Not the Vancouver I know.” Musician Johnny Reid urged the vandals to “stop the madness.” “Trying to figure out why a few idiots can leave an entire country with a black eye?”

“I’m actually disgusted,” B.C. Lions kicker Paul McCallum said in a post-game CFL interview with CP in Calgary. “They’re just out there just trying to make a mess and vandalize,” he said. “There’s no place for it.”

Article Continued Below

The Facebook cleanup organizers spelled out what volunteers should bring for a tentative 7 a.m. Pacific time start: gloves, garbage bags, friends and family, music, smile and Canucks spirit. “Let's see if we can get Vancouver looking like a new city by noon Thursday!” the page said. “Police may not be ready to have people reenter the city” that early, organizers said. “Follow the orders of any officers.” Vancouver police, meanwhile, started sending out Twitter messages Wednesday night asking people to send them mobile phone pictures and videos as evidence against the rioters.

Read more about: