About

Faradair is launching this crowdfunding campaign to enable you to be a part of the growth and development of a brand new Bio Electric Hybrid Aircraft or as we call it.... 'BEHA'

This project is about to move from the initial design phase into the primary R&D phase next year, where the design will be refined and optimised before we schedule the prototype to be built from 2016 onwards. This is your opportunity to help make a difference to the world we live in today, by being part of a new form of aviation and being able to say.... "I was with Faradair at the start of this...."

Faradair is an Anglo/US venture that is working with a select group of strategic partners to make this aircraft a reality very soon. The aircraft has been designed to meet specific criteria, so it will be built and we are asking YOU to come join us on this journey!

Please read on to see the many pledge rewards we have and how your pledge will make a difference not just to our project but to the environment we live in, for example more tree's planted around our future production facility and less reliance on plastic shopping bags!

Your support CAN make a difference, even a pledge to the value of a cup of coffee, helps this project and makes you part of our family!

It's time to BOOST this campaign!

You are joining our vision and ambition to build a prototype aircraft that makes a significant impact to aviation and the environment. Faradair is a new company dedicated to making the BEHA prototype as soon as possible, demonstrating that a six seat aircraft can be extremely quiet, low cost to operate, friendly to the environment and utilising the very latest technology available in energy recovery and materials.

BEHA is a Triple Box wing and is designed for lifting capability not speed. That said, we would expect the aircraft to perform as well if not better than many existing light twin aircraft. The first aircraft will not be pressurised and will be focused just beneath the Turboprop market in the light twin category, except in this case 'light-triple' market.

Key Features:

The aircraft will utilise twin electric fan motors delivering 200hp (horsepower) each, in combination with a 200hp bio-diesel generator that incorporates a pusher propeller protected within a duct to reduce noise and to increase safety.

This aircraft will take off and land under electric power with the bio-diesel engine used in-flight to recharge the batteries and to provide increased cross country performance.

The aircraft will employ solar skin panels and wind turbine technology for energy recovery. These technologies are not the primary power source for the electric motors, but simply additional trickle charge capability.

BEHA will provide a level of safety features including; ballistic parachute recovery fail-safe systems and a fuselage crash protection structure more commonly found in top level race cars.

will provide a level of safety features including; ballistic parachute recovery fail-safe systems and a fuselage crash protection structure more commonly found in top level race cars. The interior cabin will have a sports car feel and six seats.

The Triple Box-Wing design is predicted to generate an exceptional amount of lift while reducing wing turbulence.

This crowdfunding campaign through Kickstarter enables YOU to be part of our development journey as we secure the primary finance required to make the prototype aircraft.

Faradair is already discussing government grant options and about to discuss first round investment capital requirements with potential investors. Some of the finest Aero engineers in the UK will be helping to fine tune our design throughout 2015, with a focus on prototype and assembly facility build by 2016.

We cannot thank enough, those who have given BEHA global media coverage in over 18 different countries, including features in;

UPDATE - In addition, we have interest from investors and venture capital increasing by the day. Again, thank you to those who have given us coverage.

We believe this aircraft will be a game changer for general aviation with potential applications across multiple markets. BEHA has a design registration patent in place and while initial production will be in the UK, we expect to open a US assembly facility in coming years. Our US office in San Francisco, California, will be opening very soon.

We are looking for visionaries, enthusiasts, technology fans, believers, investors and team members. There will always be people who say, 'this will never fly' 'that is not possible'...they said the same things about the Wright Brothers, they said the same things about the sound barrier and they also said man would never get into space. Fortunately there are people who push the limits, push the boundaries and create new opportunities with a passion and a vision.....If you are one of those people, please join us and help make BEHA a reality!

Please read further to discover more about our background and some of the rewards we have created that not only make you part of our team as Patrons, but also delivers some rewards that assist the world we live in today! Or you can simply pledge now and join us!

Throughout the history of aviation, certain aircraft have been created which capture the imagination and inspire generations. In 2016 it will be 100 years since the first flight of the Sopwith Triplane and we have targeted 2016 as the year for Faradair’s own 21st Century Triplane to take flight!

Much of our inspiration came from a wonderful early passenger aircraft called the De Havilland Dragon Rapide, the aircraft that delivered 'wind turbine power generation' in the 1930's. This lightweight small twin engine airliner had graceful lines and innovative power recovery systems the principle of which we will use in BEHA.

But it was in fact an unmanned aircraft which has provided the greatest inspiration to Faradair Managing Director Neil Cloughley. 30 years ago, his father recognised the potential for the global UAV market and his company developed the rhomboid wing UAV shown below.

The Griffin UAV circa 1990

BEHA - Bio Electric Hybrid Aircraft

Combining a bio-diesel engine with two electric motors, Faradair’s Bio-Electric-Hybrid-Aircraft (BEHA) is an innovative six seat Hybrid Aircraft with total power capability of 600hp. The BEHA aircraft concept is currently building an impressive list of partners, many of which will be revealed in coming weeks but will include the renowned aviation engineering university at Cranfield, to help deliver key technologies to make the prototype aircraft a reality within the next two years.

BEHA front visualisation

Key components which set the BEHA apart from current electric aircraft are its size and true ‘Hybrid’ duel fuel capability. Faradair will develop energy recovery technologies, such as solar panel skins on all flight surfaces, combined with a revolutionary wind-turbine technology, to create battery-charging capability for both in-flight and when on the ground. Much of this power will be used for onboard systems, not primary engine power.

BEHA top visualisation with solar panels

Safety is paramount to Faradair, and other innovations include the aircraft’s autonomous capability with the ability to be remote-controlled by a Faradair ground pilot in cases of emergency. While this capability is not permitted today, BEHA will be built with the capability to be fully unmanned capable (UAV) if the requirement was needed. Plus the aircraft will be fitted with a ballistic parachute recovery system and one of the most impressive safety structures within general aviation, based on Formula 1 style crash protection. In short, this will be one of the safest aircraft to fly in.

Other benefits the plane will bring include the opportunity to assist with schemes like the European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme and Clean Skies programmes, which aim to reduce aviation emissions by 2020. Faradair intends to have production aircraft in the air before 2020.

The BEHA will give operators the ability to operate inter-city travel with minimal impact on those around them, and minimal operation costs. From flight schools, wildlife observation and emergency services, to recreational and business use, this aircraft will offer opportunities and options throughout all hours of the day and night.

BEHA top visualisation

STRATEGY

Our focus for the next 12 months is on Research and Development, and our specific goal is to complete the specifications and the fabrication of parts that will be ready to install in the prototype aircraft. The primary source of funds for this process will come from Grants that Faradair has either applied for or is about to apply for.

Faradair has partnered with Cranfield University, the UK’s leading Aerospace University. Cranfield students and Professors will be involved in making BEHA as efficient as possible through a variety of modelling and simulation. In conjunction with the BEHA technical team, they will help to fine tune the design, configure the avionics packages and to create the unique ‘dual-control’ flight mode options of manned and remote controlled flight. By the time a prototype is built, we will already know that it will fly, based on next years development work.

As part of this process, the Senior Management team of Faradair will be focused on working closely with our technology partners to deliver bespoke products for BEHA. Our US office will become the key business development and financial office for Faradair working closely with our US partners and the UK Head Office will work with our UK based technology suppliers focusing on production and sales and marketing activity. It is by working with established partner companies that Faradair will be able to complete our prototype aircraft.

REWARDS

When thinking about our rewards, we have tried to consider the environment in the offerings we have made. While we are passionate about aviation and all things 'aircraft', we are also believers in conservation and in humans doing their part to reduce the impact we make on the planet.

So whether you are simply keen to help a new venture set on providing a greener form of aviation; or you are excited by innovative aviation projects, or perhaps you simply think our BEHA is one of the most exciting and innovative aircraft you have seen for a long time….then why not join us by one of the pledge options put forward above and to the right.

Maybe you could make your contribution a Holiday Gift for a loved one? Ever had that relative that you could never think of a present to get. Why not make them a Patron of BEHA and get them a flight in the aircraft?

Our rewards are split between immediate items we intend to deliver very quickly in the new year and those items that will come from our development programme. While our amounts are showing in £ we have also given you a guide price in US Dollars as shown in the picture above, highlighting our Patron levels (These Dollar amounts may fluctuate with market exchange rates but we hope this gives you a good idea of the £ > $ conversion).

UPDATE: All backers from Silver patron and above, will now have the opportunity to experience a flight in BEHA once we have built the prototype and it has been approved for passenger flight! Further details in Update 5.

HOW WILL THE FUNDS BE USED?

It is going to take several million dollars to build the BEHA prototype. In order to attract that level of investment, we need to complete our 'proof of concept' development throughout 2015. This also involves the establishment of our interim offices in Cirencester, England and San Francisco, USA.

The primary source of funds for the 2015 R&D will come from pre-targeted grants and hopefully supported by your generous pledges. We will be happy to discuss opportunities with Angel Investors and early in 2015 we will begin our First round funding presentations to traditional financial institutions and venture capital sources.

This Project has had an enormous amount of work put into it this far and it has a long way to go yet. But with enthusiasts and investors such as yourself onboard, we will begin a journey that will prove this aircraft will fly!

Our management team is currently growing and evolving, including board members with aviation capital finance and engineers with decades of propulsion and airframe build experience.

Faradair Senior Management - Neil Cloughley, Jason Saunders and John Lane

For further information about the Faradair team, please click the image above to take you to the Faradair website.

Your funds will be used toward our stage 1 development programme and design enhancement to place Faradair and BEHA in the perfect position for stage 2 Prototype build funding. While £20,000 may not seem like much for a programme this size, it is more about joining a vision and an ambition for a new form of aviation.

Thank you for your support, we look forward to welcoming you to the team!