Goaltending guru François Allaire believes that rather than making the drastic move of enlarging the net or bowing the posts outward, the National Hockey League should instead consider shaving the size and shape of the posts.

The Anaheim Mighty Ducks' goaltending consultant, who has tutored standout netminders such as Patrick Roy, Jose Theodore, Roberto Luongo and Jean-Sébastien Giguère, would like to see the circular goal posts reduced to rounded-off rectangles. Therefore, there would be a flat surface angled inward so that shots that hit the inside of the post or crossbar would have a better chance of bouncing in for a goal.

"I don't have any official stats, but I would say one out of every four shots that beat a goalie but hit the inside of the post bounces in rather than straight out," Allaire said from his home in Boisbriand, Que., yesterday.

Story continues below advertisement

"If we can cut the posts in half and have a flat surface turned inward, you would see more goals.

"This would make the net bigger by about two inches on the width and an inch on the height. It would not take away from the skill of a goaltender, but would reward the shooter for beating the goalie."

Allaire sent his proposal to Colin Campbell last fall and the initial response was favourable, but Allaire doesn't know if his idea will be discussed at the league general managers' meeting in Detroit next week. Campbell did not return calls yesterday.

The league is apparently considering three possible changes to the traditional four-foot-by-six-foot configuration of the net. One proposal would see the goal enlarged two inches in height and two inches in width, a pitch that according to one general manager was made by NHL commissioner Gary Bettman at a general managers' meeting three years ago.

Another suggestion being considered has the goal still six feet apart at the base and top, but the posts bowed outwards to add a little extra room for shooters.

The third scheme is a combination of the previous two concepts.

Allaire sees more merit in his initiative.

Story continues below advertisement

Story continues below advertisement

"When a puck hits a post it was a scoring chance, but they don't even count a shot that hits the post a shot on goal," Allaire said. "There was no reward from beating the goalie.

"My idea is only a slight change, but it will bring a new dimension into the game." Allaire came up with the idea three years ago and has quietly lobbied NHL executives to consider his concept.

"The response has been good because, I feel, most people are reluctant to change the size of the net and although this adds some more room it does not change the dimensions," he said.

The size of the goaltenders' equipment is one of several reasons for a decrease in NHL scoring. Some have pointed the finger at the Ducks' Giguère as one of the offenders.

Interestingly, Ducks coach Mike Babcock believes that if the NHL adopts a larger net, the players will eventually adjust.

"In 1969, Major League Baseball lowered the mound and the pitchers weren't for it, but they adjusted," Babcock said yesterday. "In golf, when Tiger Woods started to bang it out there, they made the course larger. I think players will adjust if they make the nets larger."

Story continues below advertisement

The American Hockey League adopted several rule changes this season and while the flow of the game has been better, scoring has not increased significantly. At next week's meeting, the NHL GMs will also discuss some of the newer AHL rules such as the goalie's ability to play the puck behind the net, wider bluelines, tag-up offside and shootouts.