This Inji / Ginger thuvaiyal is more like a pickle I would say. Remember the Ginger Garlic Paste that I posted some time back. I made this with 1/2 kgs of ginger about a month ago and still it is keeping good and will continue to do so for at least the next 2 months. We at home make this like a chutney which would keep only for a day or 2 but this version is my MIL’s and it tastes super good with almost anything and what more it keeps well for days and months and is very simple to make. This is the last batch left and I had to click before this gets finished off too and share it here with you all...

Inji Thuvaiyal / Allam Pachadi

You’ll need :

Ginger – 200 gms

Red Chilli powder – 4 tbsp

Coriander seeds – 2 tbsp

Mustard seeds – 2 tsp

Asafetida – 1/4 tsp

Tamarind – 1 gooseberry size

Jaggery (grated) – 1 tbsp

Gingelly oil – 150 ml

Rock salt – to taste

Method:

Heat 2 tsp of oil in a pan and roast the coriander seeds to a deep brown color without burning it and keep aside. Soak tamarind in some hot water and keep aside.

Place the ginger in a bowl of water and let it be for 15-20 min. This will loosen the clay if any sticking to the ginger. Wash well by rubbing the surface under running water. Pat dry.

I used a cheese grater to peel and grate the skin of the ginger to get it off easily. After scraping the skin wash well once again and pat dry. Chop the ginger as shown in the picture above.

Heat 5-6 tbsp of oil in the same pan and add the cut ginger and sauté over low flame till the edges begin to curl and shrivel in size. This will take 8-10 mins approx. Take off stove and let it cool completely.

Place the sautéed ginger, roasted coriander seeds, red chilli powder, drained tamarind pulp and salt in a mixer jar and grind it by pulsing continually. If it becomes difficult to grind use the tamarind soaked water little by little till you grind it to a coarse paste. Scrape the sides of the mixer with the help of a spoon to grind evenly.

Heat the remaining oil in the same pan. Add mustard seeds and when the splutter add asafetida and the ground ginger thuvaiyal/pachadi. Mix well. Now add the grated jaggery and mix once again. Let it cook over low flame for 5-7 mins or till all the oil has been absorbed well.

Take off stove and let it cool completely. You can see the oil added starting to ooze out. Transfer to a clean and dry container. This will keep well for at least 3 months when stored properly.

This is traditionally served along with Pesarattu Dosa but this also goes well with idli, dosa, poori and with curd rice as well. Ginger is very good for digestion and stomach ailments and it is good to include it our daily diet. You can also check out the Ginger Tomato Chutney if you are looking for a variation.

Notes:

Try to use fresh ginger to get a good pickle.

Using gingelly oil imparts a nice flavor but you can also use any vegetable oil.

Do not leave out the jaggery. This helps to balance the spice and heat of the ginger.

Instead of using red chilli powder you can use whole red chillies and roast it in oil along with coriander seeds.

Always use a clean dry spoon while serving for increased shelf life.

I used rock salt but feel free to use regular salt.

Labels: Chutney Recipes, Pickles, Side Dishes - Idli-Dosa, Thokku Varieties