A St. Joseph County judge ruled that Notre Dame does not have to hand over police records after a lawsuit was brought on by ESPN. It's a case that centers on what the public has a right to know when crimes are committed on college campuses.

ESPN wanted police records about possible campus crimes involving student athletes.

But Honorable Steven Hostetler decided the University of Notre Dame did not have to hand records over because of a statute that's been in place for years.

Former South Bend Tribune Reporter Jack Colwell said this case is important for the public to be aware of: "What the public should be concerned about is whether they're getting the information. That's what those laws are for; not to help someone build circulation or ratings. It's so that journalists can serve as watchdogs and provide information to the public so they'll know what's really going on."

ESPN filed a lawsuit in January alleging that because Notre Dame has it's own police force, it should be held to the same standard as a public agency; rather, the University should have to provide police records upon request.

ESPN claims that the ability to make arrests is a government function, and therefore, falls under the executive branch; subject to public records requests.

The judge decided that simply having a police department does not redefine the University as a public agency.

"Now after all the years that [access to public records act] has been in effect and generally understood to not apply to private universities, it would not be appropriate for the Court to, in essence, re-write the statute," says Honorable Steven Hostetler.

Over an eight year period from 2003-2011, the judge mentiond the opinions of three Public Access Counselors. Their opinions were regarding three separate instances but all interpreted the same statute; their opinions aligned: that private universities who appoint police officers are not subject to public records requests.

The judge also called to attention another Public Access Counselor who was in disagreement with the other counselors in the ESPN v. Notre Dame case: "He then concluded that 'the Notre Dame Security Police Department should be considered a public law enforcement agency subject to the Access to Public Records Act,"... he added: "The Public Access Counselor stated that he was 'not comfortable' that a private organization could have police powers and not be subject to APRA.'"

The judge ultimately decided: "This case is not about 'comfort.' It is about what the statute says."

The judge called ESPN's arguments "persuasive policy arguments" and that the Legislature should consider this case in future policy decisions.

STATEMENT FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME:

Vice President of Public Affairs and Communications, Paul Brown, stated:

We are pleased that Judge Hostetler has agreed with thelong-recognized status of the university's records. As always, ourpolice department will continue to investigate and report in a mannerconsistent with the highest standards of law enforcement and in accordwith state law.

STATEMENT FROM ESPN:

"We are disappointed that the court didn't adopt the view of the Public Access Commission, which we believe made the correct analysis, in support of information transparency for public bodies."