Close

Sony Santa Monica is now hard at work on the highly anticipated PS4-exclusive "God of War," and it looks like the team has almost finished shooting the majority of the scenes for the game.

Sony Santa Monica's Cory Barlog has always been active in answering some of the fans' questions on his Twitter account, which gives us a slight insight on the development of the game. This time, Barlog confirmed to a "God of War" fan that the studio is almost finished with shooting, according to The Wolf Hall.

"We finished most of the shooting," Barlog answered, "but there are still some things to shoot."

There has been lack of information about "God of War" since its E3 2016 debut, skipping all major game conventions like Gamescom and Playstation Experience.

However, the director said that there might be more details to be revealed once the E3 trailer video reaches 15 million views on Youtube. The video currently stands at more than 14 million views, which means we might be less than 1 million views away from a huge reveal.

In September, Barlog said that the team is aiming to push the boundaries of the PlayStation 4 for "God of War." The "God of War" series has always maximized its resources when it comes to performance, and the PS4-exclusive title will be no different.

It is unavoidable, however, that there are some hardcore "God of War" fans and critics who are not too keen on the new direction "God of War" is taking.

Speaking out on Twitter, Barlog said. "Sorry if you are not liking the new stuff. Hopefully you'll wait to play before writing us off completely. The ace is awesome."

"I believe when people play the final game they will see our goal, and even the hardest of hearts will melt." the "God of War" director continued. "...being part of the creation of the original I can assure you, moving forward is never wrong."

Will we see new information about the game soon? Stay tuned for more "God of War" PS4 updates.

© Copyright 2018 Mobile & Apps, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.