Mage: The Ascension, Pugmire, Sales, Scarred Lands

Now available in PDF and print via DriveThruRPG: Pugmire Early Access!

“Be a good dog. Protect your home. Be loyal to those who are true. These are the words of the Code of Man.”

— Sister Picassa Collie, Shepherd of the Church of Man

Dogs have inherited the world, building the kingdom of Pugmire untold years after the Ages of Man. These dogs have been uplifted to use tools and language, and they seek to rediscover the world they’ve inherited. Some dogs use the leftover technology of humanity, but they believe it to be magic handed to them by their dead gods. Others seek to create an ideal civilization, using a Code of Man compiled from ancient, fragmentary lore left behind by humanity.

Pugmire juxtaposes the tropes of high fantasy with our relationship with domestic dogs. Dogs adventure to uncover the lost ruins of the Old Ones in search of relics, knowledge, and danger. They have access to magic that they master through faith or academic study. Enemies of Pugmire can either be monstrous or simply other misunderstood people, such as the cats of the Monarchies of Mau. Dogs have a moral code that classifies some people as “good” and others as “bad” (although not “evil” — that’s reserved for insane monsters that only seek destruction and chaos). The world is dangerous and mysterious, but good dogs will persevere.

Some highlights of Pugmire include:

An evocative, mysterious, and family-friendly setting, presented from the perspective of iconic characters like Princess Yosha Pug.

A traditional fantasy rules system redesigned for streamlined play and easy creation of heroic dogs, with an emphasis on cooperation and action over competition and violence.

A variety of callings and breeds that give focus to a dog’s role in society and in the adventuring party.

Rival races to interact with, like cats and badgers, along with terrifying and dangerous monsters that roam the landscape.

The Pugmire Early Access book is a pre-release, an advanced look at the upocming full Pugmire RPG. It is a near-complete rulebook allowing players to dive right into the world of Pugmire as the complete game is still in development.