The proposed plan aims to be completed by the end of 2014.

According to a release from the office of the Mayor’s Press Secretary, ExxonMobil will submit “remediation and improvement” plans for Ancarrow’s Landing.

Here are the proposed improvements ExxonMobil is planning to complete by the end of 2014:

Expanded parking areas for additional cars, trucks, and boat trailers

Reuse of the George Washington canal stones that are currently stockpiled and unused

Placement and use of tree islands, boulders, and signage to enhance and define the parking areas

Increased lighting with the installation of up to eight solar light fixtures based on the increased size of parking to improve safety and visibility within the parking lot

Enhancement and extension of the access trails from parking areas to the beginning of the historic Richmond Slave Trail.

The press release also states that ExxonMobil voluntarily agreed to clean up the existing site. The area was once home to a fertilizer plant, which contaminated the soil over the span of several decades. While the existing area is said to be safe currently, the redevelopment will include the removal of a large amount soil, to the tune of some 5,000 cubic yards.

According to Richmondoutside.com, Ancarrow’s Landing is an often overlooked part of the James River Park Association:

It is a functional boat landing in the tidal waters of the James, popular with fisherman and motor boaters. The acreage is largely dedicated to parking. The small series of trails in the park are mostly made my fishermen looking for the right spot to cast their lines…Ancarrow’s is a popular fishing area, especially in the spring. There is a wooded trail that connects the park to Floodwall Walk, which is part of the Richmond Slave Trail. Great Shiplock Park, Chapel Island and the Intermediate Terminal are in view across the river.



As you can see, this issue is the last item on the list for the Urban Design Committee’s meeting this morning at 10:00 AM. The Richmond City Planning Commission will take the proposal under consideration during their own meeting on May 19th.

Photo courtesy of: Richmondoutside.com

Recommend this

on Facebook



Report an error

Subscribe to our

Weekly Digest

· in East End Daily, Hills and Heights, and more