WESTFORD, Vt. -- Firearms instructor Darryl Montague's life was forever changed in an instant - the time it took for a student to pull off three senseless shots at the family firing range.

The critically-wounded Montague, shot twice in the jaw and once in the abdomen by a woman who was taking lessons from him on June 29, fought for his life at in the ICU at the University of Vermont Medical Center in Burlington.

Montague has since stabilized and is in a regular room there, his wife, Laurie Montague, said. He is the owner of Vermont Target Sports and is well-known within the firearm communities of both Vermont and New Hampshire.

The 48-year-old, however, faces a long road to recovery amidst dealing with the emotional trauma of knowing that he may never fully return to the rugged outdoor life that fueled both his livelihood and passion.

"He needs an extensive amount of rehabilitation," Montague said. "It's going to be a very long and very slow process."

Her husband has endured numerous surgeries and faces at least four more major operations, she said.

Montague's injuries are extensive. They include moderate traumatic brain injury, the permanent loss of hearing and vision on his left side, damage to the vestibular nerve which gives him persistent vertigo and damage to his abdomen, including his intestines, which remain in three separate pieces.

"That has to heal before they can put it together," Laurie Montague, a New Hampshire physician, said. That particular surgery could still be some eight months or more away.

"There is no rule book on how to fix him," Montague said, "These are all unique injuries. But, he's here. He really shouldn't be here, but he's a strong man."

The suspect, Veronica Lewis, 31, of Worcester, Vt., arrested shortly after the shooting, has been charged with first-degree attempted homicide. She pleaded not guilty to the charge the following day and is being held without bail.

Montague said the shooting occurred during the middle of Lewis's second lesson with her husband. The woman's motive was a simple one, she said.

"She wanted the gun, she shot him with his gun and took it," Montague said. "It was a random interaction, it had no relationship to him at all. He was just a means to an end. It was that cold."

The Burlington Free Press reported that Lewis is subject to an order out of New York that prevents her from possessing or purchasing a firearm, court records show.

T.J. Donovan, Chittenden County state's attorney, said at her arraignment it is unclear whether the protective order allowed Lewis to go to a firing range and shoot another person's gun, the Free Press reported.

She has a lengthy criminal record in New York City and was living at a Hundred Acre Homestead in Worcester, a Vermont-licensed therapeutic community residence, the Free Press reported.

Montague said her husband, who was initially in a coma, is now able to sit up and talk and receive visitors. That's a very good thing, she said, because his brain needs to be stimulated to recall memories, speed his healing.

"You need to rehabilitate his brain by waking it back up," she said.

Visiting friends and family, described by Montague as "our village of healing," also help to boost her husband's spirits as he comes to grips with the parts of his life that he has lost and may never regain.

That includes his 22-years as a firearms instructor, his love of hunting and the outdoors.

"He is miserable," she said. "With traumatic brain injury you don't see a lot of affect but he understands what happened. He remembers not the incident, but the person that did it. He is angry because he knows that basically everything he used to do, he can't do again. He will never shoot again. The things that have been his whole life have been taken from him."

The vertigo, Montague said, is an especially troublesome part of her husband's ordeal. "He is permanently spinning, Any time he sits up the room spins."

Doctors hope that her husband's brain will adapt and learn to tamp the spinning sensations down but it will never completely go away, she said.

Despite the daunting medical and personal challenges ahead, however, the long-term prognosis is good in that Montague will likely be able to return to some kind of functional life.

"He is going to be a functional person again, provided we don't get infection, provided we don't have a medical complication," Montague said.

The Montagues, who have been together for 20 years, been married for the last 15 and have three children. They live in Claremont, N.H., which is about two hours away from the University of Vermont Medical Center.

It goes without saying, of course, that they are dealing with a sky-rocketing array of medical and associated costs. The hospitalization costs alone are already "half-way through six figures," Montague said.

"Fortunately, I have insurance, I have decent insurance, but it doesn't cover everything," she said.

The insurance, for example, does not cover travel costs and will not cover the home care which Montague will need when he finally returns to Claremont or the modifications that will be needed to their home.

A gofundme page, set up to defray those costs, had raised $26,500 by the time of publication. Click here for a link to the page, which includes periodic updates on Montague's progress.

For now, Montague said, they are taking things one day at a time. And, remain deeply thankful for the support that they have been receiving from friends and family, the community and her husband's medical team at the University of Vermont Medical Center.

"There has been such wonderful support for (what stemmed from) such a stupid and violent criminal act," she said.