American Horror Story creator Ryan Murphy has taken to social media to announce that the next Season 7 cast member is none other than Girls creator/star Lena Dunham. The FX horror anthology series marks the actress' return to the small screen, just months after her hit HBO series Girls went off the air this spring, after six award-winning seasons. Here's what Ryan Murphy had to say in a brief statement on social media about Lena Dunham coming to American Horror Story Season 7.

"Thrilled that my talented friend Lena Dunham is joining the American Horror Story family. Always wanted to work together, and now we r!

While no further details were given about the character Lena Dunham will portray, The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that the actress will only appear in one episode of the season. Ryan Murphy confirmed in February that this new season will center around the recent Presidential election, where Donald Trump defeated Hillary Clinton. However, there will be no actors actually portraying President Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton in the series. Here's what he had to say to THR in an earlier interview about the new season.

"What I'm interested in doing is not just the obvious, single-minded point of view but rather express all sides of that equation. What needs to happen in our country now is for people to listen to each other, we may not always agree with each other and we may be horrified by what the other side is doing but we have to move toward understanding. The first 10 minutes of the season takes place in a very eerie macabre way on Election Night and there's something terrible that happens in the lives of our characters on Election Night as they're watching it all go down."

Ryan Murphy recently teased some strange new American Horror Story monsters for this upcoming season, including a bizarre elephant wearing lipstick, which could be some sort of a jab at the Republican party, whose mascot is an elephant. Another photo featured the back of an unidentified actor's head, who had his hair dyed blue, and may have been Evan Peters, although it wasn't confirmed. The third photo featured a strange head with two hands coming out of the top, with a pentagram inscribed on the face. How these drawings tie into the new season remain to be seen, but, according to Ryan Murphy, we'll finally get some new details later today.

Earlier this month, Ryan Murphy took to social media, revealing that the full title for this new season will be revealed on Thursday, July 20, although no exact time was given for this reveal. He would only add that, after this reveal, all of his cryptic clues and teases will "all make sense." Longtime series regulars Sarah Paulson and Evan Peters are confirmed to be returning, along with AHS: Roanoke stars Adina Porter and Cheyenne Jackson. They will be joined by newcomers Colton Haynes, Leslie Grossman, Billie Lourd and Billy Eichner. FX has already issued renewals for American Horror Story Season 8 and 9, so the future of this hit series is most certainly intact. While we wait for the title to be revealed, take a look at American Horror Story creator Ryan Murphy's tweets about Lena Dunham's casting and he title.

Thrilled that my talented friend Lena Dunham is joining the AMERICAN HORROR STORY family. Always wanted to work together, and now we r! — Ryan Murphy (@MrRPMurphy) July 20, 2017

Official American Horror Story Season 7 title will be revealed Thursday July 20. And suddenly... it will all make sense. — Ryan Murphy (@MrRPMurphy) July 11, 2017

Related: AHS: Apocalypse Episode 8.5 Recap: Boy Wonder