Invalid quantity. Please enter a quantity of 1 or more.

The quantity you chose exceeds the quantity available.

Please enter your name.

Please enter an email address.

Please enter a valid email address.

Please enter your message or comments.

Please enter the code as shown on the image.

Please enter an email address.

Please enter a valid email address in the To: field.

Please enter a subject for your message.

Please enter a message.

You can only send this invitations to 10 email addresses at a time.

$$$$ is not a properly formatted color. Please use the format #RRGGBB for all colors.

Please limit your message to $$$$ characters. There are currently ££££.

$$$$ is not a valid email address.

Please enter a promotional code.

N/A

Sold Out

Unavailable

Please enter a password with at least 8 characters.

You have exceeded the time limit and your reservation has been released.



The purpose of this time limit is to ensure that registration is available to as many people as possible. We apologize for the inconvenience.

This option is not available anymore. Please choose a different option.

Please read and accept the waiver.

All fields marked with * are required.

Please double check your email address. The email address format does not appear valid.

Please double check your email address. Your emails do not match.

$$$$ requires a number between ££££ and §§§§

US Zipcodes need to be 5 digits.

Postal code may contain no more than 9 letter or number characters.

Please double check your website URL.

All fields marked with * are required.

Your card CSC needs to be 4 digits.

Please confirm your order:

$$$$

You have selected to Pay by Check.



Click OK to confirm your order.

Please confirm your order:

$$$$

You have selected to Pay at the Door.



Click OK to confirm your order.

Please confirm your order:

$$$$

You have selected to Pay upon Receiving an Invoice.



Click OK to confirm your order.

Your card CSC needs to be 3 digits.

Sofort is only available in Germany and Austria.

Boleto Bancario is only available in Brazil.

OXXO is only available in Mexico.

PagoFacil is only available in Argentina.

Rapipago is only available in Argentina.

Please enter a valid IBAN number.

You need to accept to charge your bank account.

Your billing zip code needs to be 5 digits.

Please double check your CEP info. The CEP format should be something like 12345-678.

Please double check your tax identifier.

There was a problem saving your address.

There was a problem saving your card info.

There was a problem saving your personal information.

McAfee Secure sites help keep you safe from identity theft, card fraud, spyware, spam, viruses and online scams.

Copying Prohibited by Law - McAfee Secure is a Trademark of McAfee, Inc.

Unknown card type.

No card number provided.

card number is in invalid format.

Wrong card type or card number is invalid.

card number has an inappropriate number of digits.

Please enter numbers here.

Please enter an integer value.

Numbers must be less or equal to $$$$

All the required fields have not been filled out. Click OK to proceed without all the required information, or click Cancel to finish entering the missing data.

Job titles must be less than 50 characters.

There is currently an issue with card submission on Safari with iOS7. Please try again with a different browser or device.

Sorry, invalid event registration form.

Sorry, invalid event or database error.

Sorry, quantity must be a positive integer.

Sorry, you did not select a valid ticket.

Sorry, invalid event organizer email address.

Your order was canceled.

Thank You. Your order has been successfully completed. Your name and email address have been added to the list of event attendees.

Sorry, that option is sold out.

Sorry, that option is no longer available.

Sorry, you entered an invalid quantity. Please enter a quantity of 1 or more next to the type or types of tickets you would like to purchase.

Sorry, you did not select any tickets to purchase. Please enter a quantity of 1 or more next to the type or types of tickets you would like to purchase.

Sorry, there are no tickets left for this event.

The tickets, ticket quantity or date and time you've requested are no longer available, due to previous sales. Please choose a different date, time or number of tickets and place your order again.

Sorry, one or more of the tickets you requested are no longer available for purchase.

Sorry, you need to select the date you want to attend.

Sorry, the promotional code you entered is not valid yet.

Sorry, the promotional code you entered has expired.

Sorry, the promotional code you entered is not valid.

Your session has expired. Try ordering again.

Sorry, your requested ticket quantity exceeds the number provided by your promotional code.

Sorry, the payment type chosen is invalid for this event.

Sorry, there is only 1 ticket left for this event.

We're sorry, this invitation is invalid.

We're sorry, this invitation has already been used.

We're sorry, you already have an order being processed for this event. Please wait a few minutes and try again.

We're sorry, there is a problem with your invitation. Please try again.

Invalid quantity of tickets selected.

Invalid donation amount.

Sorry, the promotional code you entered has been claimed.

The payment was cancelled.

The payment was declined by the bank.

The payment failed.

The payment expired.

Bummer! This team is full. Please join a different team.

Sorry, the tickets you've selected are no longer available.

We couldn't process your order because you have this event open on multiple tabs in your browser. Please try again with only one browser tab open.

Based on the quantity selected we are unable to seat your group together. Please try a smaller quantity.

Your browser does not support picking your own seat. Please select a quantity and the best available seats will be assigned to you.

Sorry, we can't complete your order in preview. Please make your event live to complete your order.

Group registration has been disabled for this event.

Sorry, you cannot reserve seats when your event is in draft mode.

There was a problem submitting your order. Code 17

Sorry, the payment type chosen is invalid for this event.

Sorry, your billing address was not saved properly, please try again.

Sorry, we experienced an internal error, please try again.

The captcha you entered is invalid. Please try again.

Invalid card selected. You have been logged out.

Sorry, your team selection was not valid.

Sorry, the payment type chosen is invalid for this event.

Sorry, your billing address was not saved properly, please try again.

Sorry, we experienced an internal error, please try again.

Please double check your email address. The email address format does not appear valid.

State

Zip Code

Province

Postal Code

County

State/Territory

State/Province

State

This event has ended

None Zombie Day Portland Film Festival Monday, September 7, 2015 from 9:00 AM to 2:00 PM (PDT) Portland, OR Ticket Information Ticket Type Remaining Sales End Price Fee Quantity Volunteer more info Volunteer to help make Zombie Day a reality. You will be included in the film credits as a volunteer. Signing up to be a Zombie Day Volunteer means that you will help lead groups of extras in the Zombie Day Apocalypse short film directed by George C. Romero Jr. These group leaders will be the ‘pace setters’ for their ‘extra group’ and will be responsible for keeping their group moving at the speed specified by the film crew. You too will need to come in ‘zombie’ or ‘fleeing citizen’ costume and makeup in order to be an extra group leader. If you are not interested in participating in the filming of Zombie Day Apocalypse but still want to help out, don’t worry because their are several other volunteer positions available. To find out more about these volunteer positions please attend our Zombie Day Volunteer meeting: Date: Sunday 8/16 Time: 12:30 pm Location: 1139 NW Couch St. Portland, OR 97209 Thank you for signing up to volunteer for the Portland Film Festival’s Zombie Day event. Cheers! 2 Tickets Ended Free $0.00 Fleeing Citizen more info Show up spontaneous—if the world ends, how are you going to look? Do you have laundry in your hand? Are your clothed? Examples include, but are not limited to: business person, Portland weird, bikers (naked bikers ok), runners, nerds, gamers, hipsters, cowboys and more. Children (0-17) are welcome with parent/guardian approval and must be accompanied by a parent/guardian (parent/guardian must also sign up as an extra). Do your own makeup/costume. No animals. 1037 Tickets Ended Free $0.00 DIY Zombie more info Show up looking like a zombie. Do your own makeup/costume. The more fake blood the better. Make it look good, this is a movie after all. Children (0-17) are welcome with parent/guardian approval and must be accompanied by a parent/guardian (parent/guardian must also sign up as an extra). No animals. 122 Tickets Ended Free $0.00 Official Zombie Day T-Shirt - Mailed U.S. Only more info Official Zombie Day T-Shirt mailed to any where in the continental U.S. 988 Tickets Ended $21.95 $2.20 Zombie Day Bumper Sticker - Event Pick Up more info Black background with Zombie Day logo designed by the Pander Brothers. 995 Tickets Ended $5.00 $1.27 Featured extra - fleeing citizen more info Show up spontaneous—if the world ends, how are you going to look? Do you have laundry in your hand? Are your clothed? Examples include, but are not limited to: business person, Portland weird, bikers (naked bikers ok), runners, nerds, gamers, hipsters, cowboys and more. Children (0-17) are welcome with parent/guardian approval and must be accompanied by a parent/guardian (parent/guardian must also sign up as an extra). Do your own makeup/costume. As a featured fleeing citizen you will have more on-screen time. No animals. 956 Tickets Ended $39.95 $3.19 Featured extra - zombie more info Show up looking like a zombie. Do your own makeup/costume. The more fake blood the better. Make it look good, this is a movie after all. Children (0-17) are welcome with parent/guardian approval and must be accompanied by a parent/guardian (parent/guardian must also sign up as an extra). As a featured zombie you will have more on-screen time. No animals. 893 Tickets Ended $39.95 $3.19 Featured extra - crew member more info Show up looking casual and ready to pretend to be a crew member on set. We may even have you help out with the actual shoot! As a featured crew member you will have more on-screen time. No animals. No children (0-17). 997 Tickets Ended $95.00 $6.22 Supporter credit more info Be listed in the short film as a supporter. Your support will help make this project a reality! 975 Tickets Ended $15.00 $1.82 Associate producer credit (limited amount) more info Limited amount. Be listed in the short film as an associate producer. Sit in the VIP section near the director during shooting. Receive one zombie unsigned T-shirt. 8 Tickets Ended $500.00 $28.49 Producer credit (limited amount) more info Be listed in the short film as a producer. Attend all major meetings concerning the production and given specific supportive responsibilities leading up to the production, such as helping a specific department like makeup effects. Sit in the VIP section near the director during shooting. Receive one zombie T-shirt, signed by the director. 5 Tickets Ended $1,500.00 $64.95 Executive producer credit (limited amount) more info Be listed in the short film as an executive producer. Receive a VIP Pass to the 2015 Portland Film Festival. Observe all major meetings concerning the production and sit in a designated VIP section near the director during shooting. No guarantee that they can hear what the director is saying. Receive two VIP tickets to the premiere of the film in Portland, Oregon. 3 Tickets Ended $2,500.00 $94.95 Studio Sponsorship (limited amount) more info Fiscal sponsorship of the event. High level access to the cast, crew and team. 1 Ticket Ended $10,000.00 $319.95 Make a donation. more info Help bring more independent cinema to Portland and support the Portland Film Festival. The festival is a 501(c)3 non-profit. Donations are tax-deductible. Ended Enter promotional code Apply

If you have a promotional code, enter it here: Share Zombie Day Share Tweet Event Details During a campy movie shoot, the zombie apocalypse begins!

Sign up to be a zombie extra for Portland Film Festival’s Zombie Day- the Guinness World Record setting event attempting the most extras in a short film! "Zombie Day Appocalypse" is a short film directed by George C. Romero (son of the creator of the Zombie genre), written by Randall Jahnson ("The Doors", "Zorro"), and organized to set the Guiness World Record for most extras in a short film. Be an extra and help make it happen! DATE: Septermber 7, 2015 LOCATION: To be revealed during Portland Film Festival (September 1-7) HASHTAG: #ZOMBIEDAY Twitter: @zombieday

What is Zombie Day? Primarily, Zombie Day is a film shoot for “Zombie Day Apocalypse.” The film will be directed by George C. Romero Jr. (son of famed zombie director George A. Romero), written by Randall Jahnson (“The Doors” and “The Mask of Zorro”), and is set in an undisclosed location in Portland, Oregon. The film is attempting to set the Guinness World Record for most extras in a short film.

Zombie Day is a jam-packed day devoted to zombie related events–so no matter what time you are available, you will have options to participate and have fun.

The zombie shenanigans will be held on Labor Day September 7th—the last day of the Portland Film Festival, held September 1-7.

When is the Portland Film Festival? The Portland Film Festival is held September 1-7. The festival screens over 190 of the best independent films from around the world during the week leading up to and including Labor Day Weekend.

With screens spread out across the city, you can watch films from noon until midnight every day of the festival, attend workshops, classes, participate in networking events, acting or screenwriting master classes, walk the red carpet and more. Learn more about the festival or purchase tickets now at: portlandfilmfestival.com



Hello Extras! Zombie Day is tomorrow. Enclosed are the instructions for you to participate. It's our goal to set a world record and we need your help to make it happen. It's important that you follow these instructions as the safety and health of all attendees is our primary concern. All extras!! You are asked to arrive at 9am. Please arrive in costume and makeup. If you need some inspiration there are several Youtube videos showing how to apply various types of zombie/non-zombie makeup. An easy way to make a zombie costume is to take a pair of pants and a shirt, and scuff them up on the street. You can add fake blood, dirt, grass stains, and/or tear them a bit. Have fun with it! Fleeing citizens are welcome to bring any props just be aware that the Portland Film Festival is not responsible for any lost or stolen items. WE WILL NOT ACCEPT EXTRAS WHO BRING WEAPONS OF ANY KIND. THERE WILL BE NO ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PERMITTED DURING OUR SHOOT. Remember, this is a film shoot so there will be LOTS of standing around and waiting for cues, so make sure to bring something to keep you busy, especially if you have little one's joining us. Again, be aware that the Portland Film Festival is not responsible for any lost or stolen items. Anyone under the age of 18 MUST be accompanied by a parent or guardian. The Portland Film Festival reserves the right to deny anyone participation in this film at any time at our discretion. So please follow the instructions given to you by festival organizers. When you arrive to the film set (on the corner of SE Yamhill and SE 2nd) you will see registration tents/tables/PDXFF15 volunteers. If you have a "featured extra" role, please bring your proof of payment, otherwise we do NOT need to see your ticket. There are a lot of extras so we appreciate your patience. You will be required to sign a release and safety waiver, your "extra " payment acknowledgement, receive a wristband, and head over to the extra group you will be assigned to. Once you pass through registration you may head over to the Zombie Day merchandise booth and pick up your t-shirts. Please bring proof of purchase. Anyone who does not show proof of purchase for any merchandise will not be able to pick up their items on Zombie Day. If we sell out we will mail you any items purchased. Feel free to bring 1 small folding chair to sit on and 1 umbrella in case of rain. Please feel free to bring food and water. Food may be available for purchase from various Portland food trucks on site. Some free water will be provided. Pace Setters!! If you have spoken to me directly you are a pace setter. When you reach your extra group make sure you are in the front so you can set the pace for the horde. Your pace will be known to you after you register and before we begin filming. Zombie Day Apocalypse Date: 9/7/15 Registration Time: 9:00am End of shoot Time: 2:00pm Location: SE Yamhill st. and SE 2nd ave. Portland OR NOTE: If you have any further questions we will answer them upon your arrival. Parking will not be provided. Extras must find their own parking. It is advised that you take public transit. Transit directions are listed below: Public transit: From Google Maps Coming from Northeast Portland, OR: Walk 0.2mi (4min) to NE 42nd & Holman. Take Bus 75 towards St. Johns (9min, 15 stops. Stop ID: 7516) to NE Dekum & M L King. Walk about 1min to NE M L King & Dekum. Take Bus 6 towards Portland (19 min, 26 stops. Stop ID: 5904) to SE M L King & Morrison. Walk 0.1mi (3min) to SE Yamhill st. & SE 2nd ave. Portland, OR 97214 Cost: $2.50 Coming from Southeast Portland, OR: Walk 0.3mi (6min) to SE Foster & 65th. Take Bus 14 towards Portland (19 min, 29 stops. Stop ID: 1803) to SE Madison and Grand. Walk 0.4mi (7min) to SE Yamhill st. and SE 2nd Ave Portland, OR 97214 Cost: $250 Coming from Northwest Portland, OR: Walk to NW 23rd & Overton. Take Bus 15 towards Gateway TC (20min, 18 stops) to SE Belmont and SE 6th. Walk 0.3mi (5min) to SE Yamhill st. & SE 2nd ave. Portland, OR 97214 Cost: $2.50 Coming from Southwest Portland, OR: Walk 0.4mi (8min) to SW Beaverton-Hillsdale & 30th. Take Bus 54 towards Portland (16min, 14 stops. Stop ID: 367) to SW 6th & Salmon. Walk 1.0mi (20 min) to SE Yamhill st. & Se 2nd ave. Portland, OR 97214 Cost: $2.50 Other Zombie Day events!!! Z Nation Screening Date: 9/7/15 Time: 8:00pm Location: Mission Theater (1624 NW Glisan St. Portland, OR 97209) Rogue Brewery Wrap Party Date: 9/7/15 Time: 8:30pm Location: Green Dragon - 928 SE 9th ave. Portland, OR 97214 The PDXFF15 team is excited to share this amazing day with you. We can’t thank you enough for helping us break a GUINNESS BOOK WORLD RECORD for ‘MOST ESTRAS IN A SCENE IN A SHORT FILM!!!’ It is YOU who will make Zombie Day a day Portland will be talking about for ages! Thank you for your interest in Zombie Day!!

Have questions about Zombie Day? When & Where

Zombie Day Apocalypse Extra-Sign Up Location

SE 2nd and SE Yamhill

Portland, OR 97214



Monday, September 7, 2015 from 9:00 AM to 2:00 PM (PDT)

Add to my calendar

Outlook Calendar Google Calendar Yahoo! Calendar iCal Calendar Organizer Portland Film Festival Portland Film Festival

October 14-20, 2019 Named, one of the top 25 coolest film festivals in the world, the Portland Film Festival (PDXFF) is the biggest and most highly attended film-lover movie event in the Northwest. Each year, we program some of the coolest independent movies, workshops and classes around. Our festival will screen hours of movies, comedies, independents, documentaries, shorts, music videos and more. If you're interested in learning more about the industry, come for the workshops, networking opportunities, parties, talks, classes, behind-the-scene tours and red carpets. Plus, enjoy craft beer, specialty food, and all kinds of fun. We are currently accepting submissions. Submit your film today at portlandfilm.org. View organizer profile 5 upcoming events on Eventbrite 504 past events on Eventbrite