Photo: Joe Robbins / Getty Images

What is the advantage of releasing a contracted player? Hypothetically, Monte Ellis. Any cap relief if he's picked up by another team? — TRMink (@TRMink) June 26, 2017

Ellis’ five-game suspension, which aligns with the penalty for a third failed marijuana test under the NBA’s anti-drug policy, was a major disappointment for the Pacers for a couple of reasons. Ellis isn’t loud, but his voice is heard in the locker room and on the court, and on a roster suffering for a lack of leadership, this action leaves a distinct taint. It also further degenerated his dwindling trade value, making it next to impossible to move a 31-year-old guard (he’ll turn 32 in October) with declining productivity.



It only took Kevin Pritchard a couple of minutes to issue a strong statement immediately after Ellis was suspended, calling it “a very serious matter” that will be “dealt with accordingly.” Of course, the team president doesn’t have many decent options available, if the decision is to remove Ellis from the roster.



Let’s assume Ellis is untradeable. Given the prior failed attempts to find him a new home, that seems safe. Essentially, the Pacers are left with four options, all involving a release: cutting him outright, “stretching” the remaining two seasons on his contract, buying him out, or pulling a Stuckey.



The best-case scenario would be to cut Ellis outright and have another team put in a claim within the 48-hour waiver period. The claiming team would thus pick up the two years and $22.9 million remaining on his contract and the Pacers would be off the hook. This, of course, would never happen.



The more practical options come at a cost.



If the Pacers waived him between July 1 and Aug. 31, they could stretch the payments over five years -- meaning they’d owe him about $4.6 million per season through 2021-22. That would reduce the impact of the immediate cap hit, essentially turning it into an installment plan without interest. If they waived him after Sept. 1, they would have to pay the full amount of the first remaining season ($11.2 million) and stretch the second season ($11.7 million) over three years at $3.9 million per.



While stretching does not require a player’s consent, the other option -- a buyout -- would involve a negotiation, and the full price would count against the cap.



Like Rodney Stuckey, Ellis reportedly has a deadline in his contract -- the end of the '17-18 regular season -- that would void his player option for the final season. So, if the Pacers waived him before that date they would be off the hook for 2018-19 but would owe the full salary for the coming year. C.J. Miles reportedly had a similar trigger date this past season, but the Pacers held onto him for the playoffs. Those are rare contract stipulations -- ESPN's Zach Lowe suggested they might've been the only three in the league written that way -- but in this case could wind up being the least expensive option over the long haul.



Sadly, there is no more amnesty, which was a get-out-of-jail-free card for teams stuck with bad contracts.



Of course, they could always keep him and hope for the best.



But that hasn’t worked out too well the past two years.