After hours of repeated denials, a child welfare supervisor told police he may have had sex with a troubled teen under his wing — hypothetically.

"Hypothetically, we may have had consensual sex," James Cardy told police in a video interview recorded after his 2011 arrest.

Cardy, 62, has pleaded not guilty to seven charges of sex assault, touching for a sexual purpose, invitation to sexual touching, and attempted obstruction of justice.

The offences involved three alleged victims and are alleged to have occurred Jan, 1, 2010, and Nov. 30, 2010, when Cardy was director of family services for Manitou Rapids First Nation.

Cardy denied outright any improprieties with two of the younger alleged victims. He said he "may have" had sex with a then 19-year-old woman only because she was of legal age and no longer a ward of Child and Family Services.

"It might have happened, it might not have happened, but if it did it was consensual," Cardy said.

Cardy claimed "a hypothetical situation" in which the woman "consoled" him after allegations surfaced involving the two younger alleged victims.

"We might have got together and basically she consoled me say, for example… and we had sex hypothetically," Cardy said.

Asked for details about the sex, Cardy said: "If it happened, it would have been full on sex." Later he said: "This is all in my mind, I don’t know if it’s real or not."

Earlier in the trial, the now 22-year-old alleged victim testified Cardy extorted sex from her three times.

Prior to the alleged offences, the then 19-year-old woman received $840 a month for rent and food as part of an extended maintenance program (ECM). She said she was later kicked out of the program because she wasn’t going to school.

She also had a young son in the care of Child and Family Services.

In July 2010, Cardy met the woman in Winnipeg and drove her to a spot beneath the Disraeli Bridge, the woman said.

"He kept on asking me what I would do to get my ECM back," she said. "I tried to play stupid but then he unzipped his pants. He asked me to give him (oral sex). I just did it … He gave me $200 and said next day I would get my ECM."

On another occasion, in late 2010, Cardy told the woman he could help her regain custody of her son.

"He said if I kept him happy I would get my son back by the end of January," she said. "He said if I didn’t do what he wanted me to do he could go back to my workers and tell them a bunch of stuff about me."

The woman said she didn’t tell authorities, fearing they wouldn’t believe her.