Paul Pogba has yet to sign for Manchester United, but he wants to join the club he used to play for and the club want him.

Not for the first time, a major transfer has been protracted, but United are relaxed. They wouldn't be if it was late August, with just days left in the transfer window, but it's not. There are different parties to satisfy and terms to agree. These days, major moves are not just about signing a contract to play football; there are myriad other issues to resolve, including marketing and image rights.

United have felt close to being able to announce the Pogba deal several times in the last week, yet because it hasn't been made official, fans have begun to wonder what the problem is, while editors have asked whether there's another story to why he hasn't signed.

For United fans, the Pogba transfer has dominated this close season, just as Alan Shearer's potential arrival did in 1996 and Wesley Sneijder's in 2011. Neither ended up moving to Old Trafford; Shearer chose his hometown club Newcastle, who paid a world record fee (at the time) of £15 million, while financial reasons scuppered Sneijder's move.

United were never convinced that either of those two would definitely join the club. They are about Pogba, even if it has been a long, drawn-out pursuit of a player who has been linked with the biggest clubs in football since he started to excel for Juventus in 2012, not long after his free transfer from United.

At the start of this year, a move away from Italy became increasingly probable, even if Pogba's Juventus teammates were firmly under the impression that he wanted to stay in Turin and be part of a serious challenge for the Champions League title.

Others at the club were more circumspect. They knew the 23-year-old was being linked with a move to England and Spain, with Real Madrid, Barcelona and both Manchester clubs mentioned.

Economising ahead of a Camp Nou rebuild, Barca were unable to muster the kind of money Juventus would want. Madrid was a more realistic option and one whose attractions were obvious: They were European champions and their manager, Zinedine Zidane, is a fellow countryman and hero of Pogba's. Zidane wanted his compatriot to move from Juventus to the Bernabeu, in all likelihood for a world record fee, just as he did in 2001 for €75m.

United executive vice-chairman Ed Woodward said almost three years ago that the club would not be beaten on price for the best talent, and it is he who has been driving the deal to sign Pogba, the process for which included a trip Florida to meet the player and his agent last month.

Ed Woodward is closing on the signing of Paul Pogba for Manchester United.

While money might be no object, the perception could be that there are more desirable places to live than Manchester, or there might be more favourable tax conditions in other countries. Or there might be better teams than United, who finished fifth in England last season. A return to his former club was not Pogba's first choice at the end of last season.

The club sought to accentuate the positives and, during negotiations, emphasized United's sheer size and global reach upon the midfielder's representatives. They also stressed to Pogba that he'd be the third or fourth-ranked player at Madrid. Cristiano Ronaldo is first, followed by Gareth Bale; neither would be surpassed by a midfielder.

If Pogba joined United, they'd make him the No. 1, the main man. A team would be built around him and his profile would go through the roof. That delighted adidas, with whom he signed a €40m deal in March after choosing them ahead of Nike. United also wear adidas.

Sportswear giants are never shy in dropping hints to stoke the interest of the millions who follow transfer news obsessively. Many of the prompts take place on social media, and Pogba's own following has grown by 25 percent since he was linked with United.

United were later than almost every major club to have their own social media accounts -- there was concern about the lingering negative reaction to the controversial 2005 takeover by the Glazer family -- but in recent years, however, United have fully embraced the medium.

That online presence is a key part of the pitch when the club negotiate with their many commercial partners as Richard Arnold, who is second in command to Woodward among executives, explains how many fans they communicate with on a daily basis.

Players have even tweeted out promotions for club sponsors and that is hugely appealing to companies, though there has to remain a balance between commercial and sporting at the club.

Transfers have also become more of a public show. In January 2014, Juan Mata arrived at Carrington by helicopter to sign for a club-high fee of £37.1m. Now, United want to break the world record.

When they do, expect even more razzamatazz to attract greater attention and bigger headlines. Fans like it, especially younger ones, while sponsors see their logos displayed prominently. With the burgeoning interest in English football, news travels around the world. United is no longer just a Manchester business but a global entity, with a major office in London, plus auxiliary set-ups in the United States and Hong Kong.

Once Pogba's move is confirmed, expect new promotions, grand statements and a carefully-staged and marketed arrival, designed to whet the appetites of fans, for whom the fantasy (signing) is often better than the reality (of poor football in recent seasons).

Style has become as important as substance, although United also need to make a compelling football pitch. They must, for example, get around the fact there is no Champions League participation this season. But Pogba has been pushed on other factors.

It has been pointed out to him that, while the end was sour, he was largely happy during his three years at the club, that he still has friends there, including Jesse Lingard, and that he has unfinished business to attend to after his premature -- and costly -- departure.

Pogba and his agent understand all that. Now he just needs to sign on the dotted line.

Andy Mitten is a freelance writer and the founder and editor of United We Stand. Follow him on Twitter: @AndyMitten.