Donald Trump earned only the briefest of reprieves in the wake of his well-reviewed address to Congress before the full weight of the Russia scandal looming over his administration, which aides had spent weeks holding back, came crashing down on him once again. At the center of the latest intrigue was a familiar name: Sergey Kislyak.

Over the past year, the Russian ambassador to the United States has emerged as one of the most interesting, and well-connected, people in Washington. It was Michael Flynn’s undisclosed calls with Kislyak that ultimately led to the former national security adviser’s resignation last month. On Wednesday, Kislyak was again thrust into the spotlight when The Washington Post reported that he had met with Attorney General Jeff Sessions twice in the months just before the presidential election, including a private meeting in the then senator’s office, neither of which Sessions saw fit to mention to Congress during his confirmation hearing. The revelation incited a firestorm on Capitol Hill over whether Sessions perjured himself, culminating in his recusal from the ongoing federal investigation into Trump’s Russia ties on Thursday afternoon. A flood of smaller stories followed, as it was reported that Trump adviser Jared Kushner and campaign official J.D. Gordon also met with the charismatic diplomat, at Trump Tower and at the Republican National Convention, respectively.

In the past 48 hours, it seems, media profiles of Kislyak have become nearly as ubiquitous as Kislyak himself. “Who is Sergey Kislyak, the Russian ambassador rattling Trump’s presidency?” wondered The Guardian. NBC News invited readers to “Meet Sergey Kislyak, the Shadowy Apparatchik at the Center of Trump’s Russia Crisis.” “Moscow’s man in Washington is at the center of the political moment,” declared The Washington Post, while The New York Times stated, in its usual distinctive style, “Sergey Kislyak, Russian Envoy, Cultivated Powerful Network in U.S.”

Kislyak, it seems, is the Zelig of the Trump campaign and transition, appearing repeatedly as a link between Trump associates and the Kremlin at a time when Russia was was conducting a far-reaching cyber and disinformation operation to influence the outcome of the 2016 election. Those who know the man suggest his omnipresence is both more political, and less sinister, than it appears. “Let’s not be naive folks. Kislyak obviously was meeting with Sessions because of his role in Trump world,” Michael McFaul, a former U.S. ambassador to Russia, tweeted Thursday. But, he added, “That’s his job.” Paul Saunders, a Russia specialist at the Center for the National Interest, told the Post, “It seems entirely routine for the ambassador of a foreign government to want to meet with senators, for example, and especially one who is a member of the Armed Services Committee.” Last November, during a speech at Stanford, Kislyak said as much himself. “It is normal diplomatic work that we have been doing: It is our job to understand, to know people, both on the side of the Republicans and Democrats,” he said, according to the Times. “I personally have been working in the United States for so long that I know almost everybody.”

Moscow appeared to roll its eyes at the uproar over Kislyak’s connections with members of the Trump administration. “I will reveal a military secret to you: Diplomats work, and their work consists of carrying out contacts in the country where they are present,” Maria Zakharova, a spokesperson for the Russian Foreign Ministry, told the Times. “This is on record everywhere. If they do not carry out these contacts, do not participate in negotiations, then they are not diplomats.”

Kislyak, then, wouldn’t have been doing his job if he didn’t seek to meet with Sessions, an early Trump supporter who was seen before the election as a potential future Cabinet member. And Kisylak, by all accounts, is exceptionally good at his job. Trained as an engineer and fluent in French and English, Kislyak first served as an ambassador to the U.S. between 1985 and 1989. He went on to serve as the first Russian ambassador to NATO, an ambassador to Belgium, and a deputy foreign minister before returning to the U.S. nine years ago. “He doesn’t get as much credit as he should, in my view, for being savvy about developing relationships with people all over the city,” McFaul, who worked with Kislyak during the Obama administation, said in an interview with the Post. Sergei A. Karaganov, described as a “periodic Kremlin adviser on foreign policy,” characterized Kislyak to the Times as a “brilliant, highly professional diplomat.” Foreign policy adviser Vladimir Frolov echoed the sentiment: “I would describe him as Russia’s top authority on the United States.”

The bearish, 66-year-old diplomat is also known for being a fierce advocate of Russian policy. “Not all of us, myself included, initially appreciated his very tough, in-your-face style,” Dimitri K. Simes, president of the Center for the National Interest, told the Times. “We gradually came to develop a grudging respect for him as someone who was really representing the positions of his country.” R. Nicholas Burns, a former under secretary of state who has experience negotiating with Kislyak, said the Russian ambassador “could be cynical, obstreperous and inflexible, and had a Soviet mentality. He was very aggressive toward the United States.”

Others detect darker machinations at work behind Kislyak’s relentless influence campaign in Washington, where he occupies a sprawling, three-story, Beaux Arts mansion just four blocks from the White House. “As an envoy for the country he represents, Kislyak is very shrewd,” Alina Polyakova, the deputy director of the Atlantic Council’s Dinu Patriciu Eurasia Center in Washington, said in an interview with The Guardian. “From another perspective, he’s quite manipulative and nefarious in some ways.”

As news of Sessions’s meeting with Kislyak was roiling Capitol Hill, speculation arose as to whether the Russian ambassador is himself a spy or spy recruiter—a notion Moscow has denied. Steven Pifer, a former U.S. State Department official who now works at the Brookings Institution, dismissed the idea. “That strikes me as pretty odd. Everything I’ve seen, he’s been a Russian diplomat,” Pifer told The Guardian. Polyakova wasn’t so sure, “It’s certainly possible. During the Soviet days the embassy was known to serve that function.”

John McLaughlin, who served as acting director of the C.I.A. during the Clinton administration, suggested that Kislyak’s true role might fall somewhere in between. “I don't think he’s a spy literally. He is a veteran diplomat,” McLaughlin said Thursday during an interview with MSNBC. “He would certainly be collecting information. That’s what diplomats and spies do.”