Steven Aftergood, a government secrecy specialist at the Federation of American Scientists, said the ruling was “clearly a rebuff to the administration’s secrecy policy.”

“What makes it particularly significant is that it applies not just to a single document but to a habitual practice of government officials,” he said, “which is to say, ‘I’m going to talk about something that’s classified, but I’m not going to give you the underlying records.’ ”

Lawyers for the plaintiffs praised the ruling.

David E. McCraw, a lawyer for The Times, said: “The court declined to accept at face value the government’s claims about national security and instead did a searching and independent review of the record.”

Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, added: “This is a resounding rejection of the government’s effort to use secrecy, and selective disclosure, as a means of manipulating public opinion about the targeted killing program. The government can’t pretend that everything about its targeted killing program is a classified secret while senior officials selectively disclose information meant to paint the program in the most favorable light.”

Mr. Awlaki, a New Mexico-born cleric who the Obama administration contends had become a senior operative in the Yemen branch of Al Qaeda, was killed in a Sept. 30, 2011, drone attack that also killed Samir Khan, an American citizen who had moved to Yemen from North Carolina, and who administration officials say had not been specifically targeted.

The panel noted that the plaintiffs had not challenged the legality of drone strikes or targeted killings, and it said that the government had not waived secrecy concerning operational details in the memorandum, which it said had been prepared by the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel, ran 41 pages and was dated July 16, 2010.

Judge Newman wrote that even if the public statements by administration officials, before and after Judge McMahon’s opinion was issued, were not themselves “sufficiently detailed to establish waiver of the secrecy of the legal analysis,” they established the “context in which the most revealing document,” the so-called white paper, “should be evaluated.”