SAN JOSE — New Santa Clara County guidelines that tripled the dollar amount a warrant must be to jail a person are being met with resistance from San Jose police Chief Eddie Garcia, who says the change discourages officers’ diligence on the streets.

County officials say by raising the arrest threshold from $5,000 to $15,000, they were modernizing decades-old policies and decreasing the number of people incarcerated for minor offenses, and that the move is merely a resetting of priorities rather than drawing a bright line at the jails.

The new guidelines mean that if police officers encounter someone with an active misdemeanor warrant, and it’s less than $15,000, the county is advising them to issue the person a citation to appear in court rather than take them to jail. Violent misdemeanors are exempt from the recommendations.

“They can still arrest anyone they want,” Deputy County Executive Garry Herceg said. “What we’re talking about are misdemeanors most counties don’t even book anyway.”

But Garcia said he is wary of the message that sends to his officers. Namely, he doesn’t want his officers to start doing dollar math in their heads before deciding on pursuing someone who may be dangerous.

“The way it sounds to the rank and file is, if you bring someone in on a warrant less than $15,000, they’re going to get cited and released if you bring them to jail,” Garcia said. “It’s also a message to the community that these warrants are not deemed important by the county.”

He recently sent a memo to his department telling his officers to continue to rely on their own judgment on making arrests, not the new guidelines.

“I’m not taking away my officers’ discretion. If they feel they need to keep the community safe by taking someone into custody, they should,” Garcia said. “It will not be us releasing them, it will be the county releasing them.”

The memo also stated that firearms-related warrants will be cause for mandatory arrests in San Jose, regardless of the warrant amount.

“There is no gray area for firearms,” Garcia said. ‘We’re not playing games with firearms.”

Herceg, a former probation officer in Monterey and Santa Cruz counties, said the concerns he has heard voiced in the wake of the new guidelines — instituted about two months ago — don’t align with what will actually happen in practice. He said the changes were informed by representatives of the District Attorney’s Office, Public Defender’s Office, Sheriff’s Office, Department of Corrections, county re-entry services and county pre-trial services.

“The jail custody guidelines had not been updated in 30 years,” he said. “Bail has undergone inflation. This is going to have a nominal impact. It’s not going to cut the jail population in half.”

What it will do, Herceg said, is cut down on revolving-door jail trips for defendants accused of minor offenses like petty theft and drug possession.

“Why do we need to have them (in jail) for two to three days if a judge is going to release them anyway?” he said. “I understand (the chief’s) perspective, but we’re evolving in the criminal-justice system. Detention makes people worse. Realizing the cost of incarceration versus the outcome it produces, it’s not good.”

That idea resonates with Raj Jayadev, director of Silicon Valley De-Bug, a local civil-rights group that has advocated heavily for bail reform and against over-incarceration.

“What we’ve seen is that lives can be destroyed in a two-day detention. Families could be torn apart, jobs and houses can be lost,” Jayadev said. “A warrant is not a conviction. They’re bypassing due process when they refer to people with warrants as criminals. It can’t be about trying to lock up as many people as possible.”

But Garcia and other law-enforcement veterans say the new guidelines introduce confusion for officers in the field, if it’s true that their arrest discretion will still be honored.

“Why change it at all then?” he said.

Jim Dudley, a retired San Francisco police deputy chief and criminal-justice lecturer at San Francisco State University, warned of unintended consequences if the new guidelines are followed to the letter.

“It’s gonna come back to bite us. The public has to take a look at this stuff, and the long-term effects of these changes,” Dudley said. “If you don’t want those individuals on the loose, the chronic smash-and-grab burglaries, the house burglaries, the porch thieves.”

He added: “Cops are getting totally frustrated. Cops are also famous for taking the path of least resistance. If they see they’re going through a hamster wheel for these misdemeanors, will they continue to chase and pursue?”