ST. PAUL, Minn., April 23, 2014 – The Board of Trustees of Minnesota State Colleges and Universities today appointed Dr. Anne Blackhurst as president of Minnesota State University Moorhead. Her appointment becomes effective July 1, 2014.

In recommending her appointment, Steven Rosenstone, MnSCU chancellor, said, “Dr. Anne Blackhurst has been an outstanding provost for Minnesota State University Moorhead, with a deep appreciation of the university’s unique strengths and the quality of its academic programs. As MSU Moorhead’s president, Dr. Blackhurst will continue to partner with students, faculty, staff, and community leaders to address the critical needs of the university and the Fargo-Moorhead region.”

Dr. Blackhurst has served as provost and senior vice president for academic affairs at Minnesota State University Moorhead since 2011. Previously, she served at Minnesota State University, Mankato as acting vice president for academic and student affairs from 2010 to 2011, as interim dean and dean of graduate studies and research from 2006 to 2010, as chair of the department of counseling and student personnel from 2000 to 2001 and 2005 to 2006, and as professor in the department of counseling and student personnel from 2004 to 2011. She holds a bachelor’s degree in economics from Boise State University, a master’s degree in counseling from the College of Idaho, and a doctorate in college student personnel from Ohio University.

“It is a tremendous honor to be named president of this outstanding university,” said Dr. Blackhurst. “It has been a unique privilege to work with the outstanding faculty, staff and students at MSU Moorhead, and I look forward to continuing in this new role as we deliver on our promise to provide students with the opportunity to discover their passions, the rigor to develop intellectually, and the versatility to shape a changing world.”

Minnesota State University Moorhead offers 76 undergraduate majors with 172 different emphases and options, nine pre-professional studies programs, 10 graduate degree programs, and 11 graduate certificate programs. A recently completed strategic plan focuses the academic experience around being the partner of choice to meet Minnesota’s workforce and community needs. MSUM enrolls approximately 7,000 students from 37 states and 56 countries. Named a Top 10 College Town (Livability, August 2011), Moorhead, MN, and Fargo, ND, are central to a thriving regional center. Higher education is a major community enterprise, with more than 26,000 students contributing to an atmosphere rich in arts, culture, sports and social activities.

Dr. Blackhurst succeeds Dr. Edna Szymanski, who has served as president of MSUM since 2008 and is retiring in June.

The Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system includes 24 two-year community and technical colleges and seven state universities serving more than 430,000 students. It is the fifth-largest higher education system of its kind in the United States.