ROG Strix just debuted its first motherboard - ROG Strix X99 Gaming, and now the new ROG Strix line welcomes its first gaming laptop and wireless gaming headset for ultimate gaming on the go. ROG Strix GL502 is a 15.6-inch gaming laptop created for a perfect balance of gaming prowess and portability, while ROG Strix Wireless brings gamers big sound with no strings attached - literally.

ROG Strix GL502

Many consider a 15-inch laptop as the sweet spot for portable gaming, since it has the biggest display possible while stilll being able to fit in virtually any backpack, most importantly - to carry around with ease. ROG Strix GL502 features such a size with a 15.6-inch, and utilizes an awesome non-glare IPS (in-plane switching) display for true, accurate colors and wide 178-degree viewing angle. You can also opt for Full HD (1080p) or glorious 4K Ultra-HD. To power a 4K display (as you probably already know) requires hardware with a hefty punch, up to NVIDIA GeForce GTX 980M graphics with 8GB of GDDR5 video memory delivers exactly that. You'll be ready for the latest DirectX 12 games, while G-SYNC synchronizes the display’s refresh rate with the GPU to reducing lag, minimizing frame-rate stutter, and eliminating visual tearing.

GL502 is just 23.5mm thick and weighs only 2.2kg! Even so, it is powered by the latest-generation quad-core Intel Core i7 processor, up to 32GB of high-performance 2,133MHz DDR4 RAM, and up to 512GB M.2 NVM Express (NVMe) PCIe x4 SSD in tantem with an up to 2TB HDD so you have both blazingly fast performance and large storage capacity. An exclusive cooling system makes all this possible, incorporating copper heat-pipes and dual fans that cool the CPU and GPU independently to maximize cooling efficiency for system stability - even when running the most hardware-intensive games.

ROG Strix Wireless

The ROG Strix Wireless gaming headset provides big sound with the freedom to play games without getting freaked out by some weird slithering creature on your lap or arm. Using 2.4GHz wireless technology along with a dual, auto-switching antenna design, freedom doesn't have to come with compromise. A stable, interference-free wireless connection and an up to 15-meter transmission range gives you the confidence to go wireless, hassle free. The rechargeable 900mAh battery in tandem with low power-consumption technology equate to more than 10 hours of uninterrupted fun after each full charge, although we can't possibly recommend anyone to play for that long without a break anyway.

The exclusive Sonic Studio audio software lets you enjoy 7.1 virtual surround sound for even more gaming immersion, and allows for full control over the equalizer and sound level in each audio channel. Personalize the sound how you like it, and know where your enemies are before you see them.

ROG Strix Wireless comes with a cable allowing you to connect it to your PlayStation 4 or Xbox One consoles, smartphone, or tablet. A 1.5m Y-cable extension is also included in case you forget to charge the headset, wired or wireless - it's your choice.

Hit the PR button below for more details!