Kung-Fu Heroes will take you to eight different castles filled with a host of traps and obstacles. Whether or not you make it to the last castle depends on your quick wits and reflexes. (Photo: Business Wire)

In Flying Warriors, fight through four game modes and choose one of two different fighting styles: one for beginners and one for those who can master the martial arts. (Photo: Business Wire)

In Flying Warriors, fight through four game modes and choose one of two different fighting styles: one for beginners and one for those who can master the martial arts. (Photo: Business Wire)

REDMOND, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--This week’s Nintendo Download includes the following featured content:

Nintendo Mobile Fire Emblem Heroes : Choose Your Legends Event – To prepare for the launch of the Fire Emblem Heroes game on Feb. 2, Nintendo has kicked off the Fire Emblem Heroes: Choose Your Legends event. Fans can visit https://events.fire-emblem-heroes.com/vote to browse through characters from the Fire Emblem franchise and select the ones they’d like to see make an appearance in Fire Emblem Heroes . The global community’s top-ranked hero and heroine will then be featured in Fire Emblem Heroes as Choose Your Legends event characters. Nintendo Account holders will receive a Platinum point bonus for voting. Voting ends at 9:59 pm PT on Tuesday, Jan. 31.

Nintendo eShop on Nintendo 3DS Use Pokémon Bank with Pokémon Sun and Pokémon Moon – Calling all Pokémon fans! Pokémon Bank is now compatible with the Pokémon Sun and Pokémon Moon games, which means the Pokémon that adventured with you in the Pokémon Omega Ruby , Pokémon Alpha Sapphire , Pokémon X and Pokémon Y games will be able to join you in Pokémon Sun and Pokémon Moon . The Pokédex and Poké Transporter applications are also getting some fun updates! For additional details, restrictions and service fee information, visit http://www.pokemonbank.com/.

Virtual Console on Wii U Flying Warriors – When the evil red star appears in the sky, the great monster of the Dark Dimension, Demonyx, returns. The five Flying Warriors, led by Rick Stalker, are sent by the Dragon Lord to defeat Demonyx. In this NES action game, fight through four game modes and choose one of two different fighting styles: one for beginners and one for those who can master the martial arts. Use items and Mystic Spells in your quest to rescue the Light Dimension from darkness. Kung-Fu Heroes – Monsters have taken Princess Min-Min. The whole land has fallen into sorrow. Only Kung-Fu Masters Jacky and Lee can save the princess and retrieve the treasures. This NES game will take you to eight different castles filled with a host of traps and obstacles. Whether or not you make it to the last castle depends on your quick wits and reflexes. Little Ninja Brothers – You are spirited Ninja boys, Jack and Ryu, who take off on a journey to defeat the Yoma Clan. In this NES spiritual sequel to the Kung-Fu Heroes game, fight enemies with various skills such as punches, kicks, swords and throwing stars. Take your attacks to the next level with special items like the Iron Claws and the Crush Punch. Work as a team to bring peace back to Chinaland.



Nintendo eShop sales:

Nintendo eShop on Wii U and Nintendo 3DS Great deals this week include Kutar Ski Lift (Nintendo 3DS), Toon Tanks (Wii U) and Power Disc Slam (Nintendo 3DS), plus several more! Check out the full list of deals on Nintendo 3DS and Wii U available this week at http://www.nintendo.com/games/sales-and-deals.



Also new this week:

Candy, Please! (Nintendo eShop on Nintendo 3DS)

(Nintendo eShop on Nintendo 3DS) Word Search 10K (Nintendo eShop on Nintendo 3DS)

In addition to video games available at retail stores, Nintendo also offers a variety of content that people can download directly to their systems. Nintendo adds new games weekly to Nintendo eShop on the Wii U console, the Nintendo 3DS family of systems and the Wii™ Shop Channel for the Wii console.

Nintendo eShop is a cash-based service that features a wide variety of content, including new and classic games, applications and demos. Users can add money to their account balances by using a credit card or purchasing a Nintendo eShop Card at a retail store and entering the code from the card. All funds from one card must be loaded in Nintendo eShop on either Wii U or the Nintendo 3DS family of systems, but can be used in either Nintendo eShop if the systems are linked to a single Nintendo Network account.

The Wii Shop Channel offers games and applications and uses Wii Points™, which can be purchased via the Wii Shop Channel. The Nintendo DSi™ Shop offers games and applications and uses Nintendo DSi Points™. Click here for details about the recent Nintendo DSi Shop service change.

Remember that Wii U, Wii, New Nintendo 3DS, New Nintendo 3DS XL, Nintendo 3DS, Nintendo 3DS XL, Nintendo 2DS and Nintendo DSi feature parental controls that let adults manage some of the content their children can access. Nintendo 3DS players who register a Nintendo Network ID gain access to free-to-start games and free game demos from Nintendo eShop, and also get the latest news and information directly from Nintendo. For more information about this and other features, visit http://www.nintendo.com/wiiu or http://www.nintendo.com/3ds.

Note to editors: Nintendo press materials are available at http://press.nintendo.com, a password-protected site. To obtain a login, please register on the site.