"We are not criminals. We are doing a good thing," he said. "We are being portrayed as drunken college kids."

Meanwhile, about a dozen security officers were out Sunday, walking in pairs on Ezra Street and around the Laurier campus to watch for any disturbances.

Deputy Police Chief Kevin Chalk said a platoon of officers was dedicated on Sunday for any St. Paddy's Day parties that started early.

On Monday, nearly 100 officers will be on the street during the annual St. Patrick's Day Ezra Avenue party and another 100 officers will be on standby.

Police say they don't want to stop the fun, but they want to ensure the event is a safe one. Last year, nearly 7,000 people crowded on Ezra Street and police worried about the potential for trouble with increased crowds.

Officers, including some from the public safety unit, will be patrolling the area. Police also plan to keep Ezra Street open to traffic.

This year, the City of Waterloo, in partnership with the universities, agreed to erect a tent and hold a party in a controlled venue on Seagram Drive next to the K-W Granite Club.

XL Lifestyle of Toronto, an event production company, is providing the entertainment in the tent including a local band and local DJs. The headliner is New York City-based DJs The Chainsmokers.

Tickets are sold out for the event which can hold up to 3,000 revelers. A free pancake breakfast will be held at 11 a.m. The event ends at 6 p.m.

The 24-metre-by-6-metre tent will be heated but "it won't be Acapulco," said Graham Bauckham of Varsity Tents from Toronto.

"We won't go crazy with the heat. It's not a gala event," he said. "My job is to build it up and make it safe."

There are 50 portable washrooms on site and food trucks will be on hand.

Last year, there were about 150 liquor-related offences laid at the street party, including open liquor, public intoxication and drinking under 19. There were four criminal charges, including two impaired driving, assault with a weapon and assault.

lmonteiro@therecord.com Twitter: @MonteiroRecord