For the last three seasons, the AFC South has been dominated by the Indianapolis Colts. Indianapolis made its first AFC Championship game under Andrew Luck last season, but stumbled against the New England Patriots. Still, Indianapolis notched two impressive playoff wins over the Cincinnati Bengals and the Denver Broncos prior to the AFC Championship game. Indianapolis has added some key veteran leaders that fans hope can get this team over the hump. With an improved roster, there will be some highly demanded Colts tickets on the secondary market.

Entering the 2015 season, Indianapolis’ most expensive home game will be its Week 9 meeting with the Denver Broncos. The get-in price for Colts vs Broncos tickets is $133, the only Colts game with a get-in price above $100. Denver will be hell-bent on avenging its home playoff loss while Peyton Manning will look for his win (as a visitor) at Lucas Oil Stadium. There is also a possibility Manning becomes the NFL’s all-time leader in passing yards during this game against his former team.

[embedit cf="HTML1"]

Indianapolis will also play the New England Patriots for a Sunday Night Football game in Week 6. The get-in price for Colts vs Patriots tickets is $90. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers will visit Lucas Oil Stadium in Week 12 for Indianapolis’ least expensive home game. The get-in price for the game is just $44.

Indianapolis has had a busy off-season. Indianapolis inked former Miami Hurricane teammates, Andre Johnson and Frank Gore, to provide some veteran leadership. Johnson was quickly scooped up after he was cut by the Houston Texans while Gore found a home in Indy and will lead a backfield that was sorely missing a bellcow. Indy did opt to re-sign Daniel Herron, who will likely spell Gore on third downs. Indy did add CFL-star wide receiver Duron Carter, but he isn’t expected to make a big impact this season. Indianapolis has needs on its offensive line and secondary, so expect them to address it during the draft. Don’t be surprised if Indianapolis added a running back later in the back.