The 30-year-old says he is open to playing anywhere the world, with the United States an attractive option amid reported interest from PSG and Manchester United.

Cristiano Ronaldo acknowledges he is "definitely thinking" about leaving Real Madrid for a year in MLS, despite his agent Jorge Mendes saying the star will end his career at the Bernabeu.



Ronaldo, 30, has been linked with Paris Saint-Germain and his former club, Manchester United, although Mendes said earlier on Friday that Ronaldo "will finish his career at Real Madrid, for sure."



However, the Portugal international says he would consider offers to play anywhere in the world, suggesting that a year in the United States - where the likes of David Beckham, Thierry Henry, Steven Gerrard, Frank Lampard and Andrea Pirlo have moved in recent years - would be tempting.



"I am not closing the door on any league anywhere in the world," he told FHM Magazine. "I'm definitely thinking about playing in the USA for a year. I've always said living and playing there is a possibility."





Ronaldo left Old Trafford for Madrid in 2009 for a then-world record fee of 80 million pounds, and has spoken of how Sir Alex Ferguson and his former United teammates helped him become the player his is today.



"There I was treated in the same way as a son is treated by a father," he said. "I had some incredible moments. I'm still in touch with [Rio] Ferdinand, Nani, Anderson, [Nemanja] Vidic, [Patrice] Evra... and with [Ryan] Giggs, who is now the assistant manager. I have some amazing memories."



The Madrid forward also put other Premier League clubs on potential alert as he praised the fans in the English top flight, adding: "They are incredible. For me, they are some of the best in the world. They are polite, they respect you, they motivate you and they cheer you on. I love them."



Earlier on Friday, Laurent Blanc refused to elaborate upon his exchange with Ronaldo during Paris Saint-Germain's meeting with Real Madrid in midweek. The forward was pictured talking into Blanc's ear on the touchline before later winking at president of the Parisian club Nasser Al Khelaifi.