Explained: Politicians' entitlements rules and why they're under fire

Updated

Health Minister Sussan Ley's decision to step down from cabinet amid an expenses scandal has reignited calls for tougher restrictions on politicians' entitlements.

The Nigerian-born former pilot has faced a public backlash after purchasing a $795,000 luxury apartment while on a taxpayer-funded trip to the Gold Coast.

Despite insisting two separate investigations will prove she broke no rules, Ms Ley has admitted she failed the "pub test".

Labor and South Australian senator Nick Xenophon have already called on the Government to introduce changes to entitlements recommended by the Finance Department last year.

What entitlements are under fire?

Ms Ley's travel arrangements were booked before the sweeping review, which was launched after former speaker Bronwyn Bishop used chartered helicopters to attend party fundraisers.

Ms Bishop resigned in August 2015 after a fierce public backlash for spending more than $5,000 on a flight from Melbourne to Geelong, a mere two-hour drive.

The review, which was instigated by former prime minister Tony Abbott but has not been acted on, found politicians were "undermining public confidence" and called for travel arrangements to present value for money.

Among 36 recommendations, it took issue with family reunion provisions that allow politicians to fly family interstate for holidays while on parliamentary business.

This came after Tony Burke was criticised for a four-day return trip from Sydney to Central Australia in 2015, when he charged taxpayers $2,181 for his own flights and $8,656 for four family members.

The review made it clear charging taxpayers for short helicopter trips was not appropriate and ruled out chauffeured cars, limousines and COMCAR travel for personal business.

It is not uncommon for ministers to step aside while under investigation.

Arthur Sinodinos, who will cover Ms Ley's portfolio, stood aside as assistant treasurer in 2014 amid a corruption inquiry.

The rules as they stand

Under the Parliamentary Entitlements Act 1990, all politicians have their travel within Australia covered if they are on Parliamentary or electorate business — including first class tickets on scheduled commercial services.

If heading overseas, these entitlements can extend to clothing allowances and medical services.

Politicians are also entitled to a travel allowance for overnight stays, with varying rates for different positions and locations.

For example, all politicians can claim $273 for an overnight stay in Canberra but this increases to $498 in Karratha.

Office holders are given larger allowances in some locations, while the Prime Minister is limited to $564 for each overnight stay in a place other than an official establishment or the Prime Minister's home base.

Accommodation and sustenance at official establishments is provided at Government expense.

There is also a limit on the number of overnight stays that politicians can claim — up to 90 for some MPs.

Ministers can also claim the cost of travel for their spouse, if it is in Australia and for official purposes.

All politicians are entitled to a private-plated vehicle to be used for parliamentary, electorate or official business, but can instead choose an additional $19,500 per annum of electorate allowance to meet the costs of transport within and for the service of the electorate.

How much did your local MP spend?

Explore how much your local politician spent from January 1 to July 30 in 2015 with our interactive chart, ordered from the politician with the most expenses claimed to the least.

Some past politicians will also appear, having lodged prior expenses with the Department of Finance during the six-month period.

Topics: federal-government, government-and-politics, australia

First posted