Get the biggest celebs stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Brad Pitt has not been able to see his children for days despite the family being thrown into turmoil after Angelina Jolie filed for divorce, it has been claimed.

An insider has told People magazine that Brad has not seen any of their six children, and they also claim that the former couple have not been in contact either.

"Angelina and Brad have not been in contact at all,” they told the magazine.

Meanwhile it has been claimed that Angelina is keeping a low profile at a secret location in Los Angeles with the children.

“Angelina and the kids are staying at a rented house in L.A.,” an insider told Us Weekly.

(Image: WENN.com)

(Image: REX)

Angelina and Brad own a sprawling property in California, however have chosen to stay elsewhere as the world's media camp outside waiting for a glimpse of the family with includes Maddox, 15, Pax, 12, Zahara, 11, Shiloh, 10, and twins Knox and Vivienne, eight.

The distance between Brad and the children comes as it has been revealed that the World War Z actor is being investigated by the FBI over child abuse allegations.

(Image: Fameflynet)

A good relationship? Brad Pitt and eldest son Maddox interact on red carpet

He is currently being investigated by the FBI over claims he was "verbally abusive and physical" with his son Maddox during a flight on a private jet.

The actor is accused of being "wasted" and "screaming" while in the air with his partner and two of their children.

A source told Mirror Celebs that the FBI is investigating the claims as a jurisdictional issue due to the alleged incident taking place in the air.

In a statement, the FBI said allegations involving an "aircraft carrying Mr Brad Pitt and his children" had been referred to the agency.

"The FBI is continuing to gather facts and will evaluate whether an investigation at the federal level will be pursued," it added.

The insider added Pitt - who is "cooperating fully" with authorities - denies being abusive and wants to do what is best for his children.

Brad Pitt abuse claims: LAPD deny they're investigating actor over shock allegations

As the plane touched down, The Sun reports that the World War Z star allegedly continued his “rant” at the 15-year-old before then trying to leave the place in a fuel truck on the tarmac.

The Mirror understands the alleged incident was the tipping point for Jolie to call time on their 12-year relationship.

She split from him the next day.

Angelina Jolie 'willing to co-parent with Brad Pitt but wants full physical custody for now'

According to reports in the US, the 52-year-old is now to be at the centre of a probe by LA County Department of Children and Family Services and has been questioned by investigators along with Jolie.

(Image: Getty)

The children are also expected to be spoken to, and it was claimed authorities had been tipped of anonymously by either someone on the plane or at the airport.

The complaint claims Pitt was drunk at the time.

A day after the actor’s alleged meltdown Jolie, 41, broke the news to Pitt she wanted to end their two-year marriage and 12-year romance.

“Angelina Jolie Pitt has filed for dissolution of the marriage,” a statement from her rep read.

”This decision was made for the health of the family. She will not be commenting at this time and asks that the family be given their privacy during this difficult time.”