"You know, at some point, if you want to be president of the United States, you gottta get familiar with the United States," Clinton said of Trump's pattern of making only day trips to campaign before returning to New York City at night. | AP Photo Clinton to Trump: You can't just fly in on your big jet and go home

Hillary Clinton unveiled a new line of attack against Donald Trump on Monday, mocking him for living high on the hog in his Trump Tower and rejecting the problems of non-billionaires, such as the national minimum wage.

"I have said, 'Come out of those towers named for yourself and actually talk and listen to people.' You know, at some point, if you want to be president of the United States, you gotta get familiar with the United States. You gotta spend time with Americans of all sorts and backgrounds in every part of our country," Clinton said at an event in Wilmington, Delaware.

She then made an argument that could carry into a general election contest: Trump is out of touch with everyday Americans.

"Don't just fly that big jet in and land it, go make a big speech and insult everybody you can think of and then go back, get on that big jet, and go back to you know your country club house in Florida or your penthouse in New York," Clinton said. "I somehow don't think that kind of puts you in touch with what's going on. I have spent now more than a year talking and listening to people, and I can tell you there's a lot of concern. People are having a hard time."

Clinton has pivoted toward Trump and Ted Cruz in recent days as she gets closer to putting Bernie Sanders in her campaign's rearview mirror, barely mentioning her Democratic rival during speeches on Monday.

Instead, she criticized what she called "division” on the GOP side of the presidential race, before going on to slam Trump and Cruz on their policy positions.

"When you hear Trump and Cruz and the Republicans talking about their economic policies, they want to go back to what failed us before," Clinton said, after praising her husband's economic plans as president. "They talk a good game, but if you look at what they are actually putting out, they want to slash taxes on the wealthy."

She also attacked Republicans on their statements about climate change, claiming many have been agnostic about the issue and should "talk to a scientist," and adding that a commitment to renewable energy would create jobs.

Clinton aimed specifically at Cruz for his suggestion to monitor Muslim neighborhoods in the United States, saying the idea “makes no sense” and “sends a terrible message.”

Later Monday, Clinton said at an event in Youngwood, Pennsylvania that some statements by Cruz and Trump could be "dangerous." She said Trump's suggestion to rethink NATO, for example, would be a "terrible mistake."

“It’s the worst time for us to walk away from that defense alliance," Clinton said.