Mazda Road to Indy Becomes First Open-Wheel Racing Series on Xbox



BIRMINGHAM, Ala. – After becoming the first American racing series with a dedicated broadcast channel on demand via Apple TV, Amazon Fire and Roku last April, Mazda Road to Indy TV today announced another landmark. The Mazda Road to Indy Presented by Cooper Tires will now be the first open-wheel racing series to have an Official App on Xbox One.



Developed by Microsoft, Xbox One was the top-selling console in the U.S. in the second half of 2016. Microsoft continues to expand its gaming business, and features the most advanced multiplayer network on Xbox Live. In January of this year, Microsoft said Xbox Live monthly active users reached a record 55 million.



Users can also stream videos and watch Blu-ray movies on Xbox One as well as enjoy Apps like Netflix, HBO GO and ESPN and now Mazda Road to Indy TV.



Developed by JP Manterola, CEO of Pro Racing Group and Executive Director of Mazda Road to Indy TV, and his team, the Xbox One App brings all of the racing action and behind-the-scenes content from the Mazda Road to Indy into televisions around the world.



All three levels of the unique driver development ladder system – Indy Lights Presented by Cooper Tires, Pro Mazda Presented by Cooper Tires and the Cooper Tires USF2000 Championship Powered by Mazda – will be featured on the Xbox One App.



“With the launch of our Xbox App, we’re not only spearheading a new medium that provides free accessibility to viewers worldwide, but we’re delivering an experience into the heart of their home,” said Manterola. “In the U.S. alone, 65 percent of households own a video game console, so we are excited to witness how this will impact the next generation of racing fans.



“We are providing an exciting community for our viewers that makes them feel inclusive and exclusive simultaneously.”



The Xbox One App complements the Mazda Road to Indy TV App currently available for mobile devices, and provides an expansion and accessibility to users that are not utilizing current mediums.



“Road to Indy TV has done a fantastic job with the new Xbox One App,” said Belardi Auto Racing’s Shelby Blackstock. “It is very accessible and easy to use. It's a great way for fans to keep up with current and past seasons, along with off-track video footage.”



“The Xbox One App helps us to reach a key target audience by expanding to platforms utilized by young adults,” said Dan Andersen, Owner and CEO of Andersen Promotions. “We are excited to roll out the new App in time for our races at Barber Motorsports Park this weekend.”