This is an introductory post on the Jewishish media machine — how everything connects, starting from the racism, to self hating Asian women, leading to the birth of half Asian, half white kids.

Youtube reference: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jBCyz444GMo

(The video might get taken down; I will download the video and re-upload it when I have the time)

Summary: An Asian girl is complaining that (white) kids at her school bully her for Asian stereotypes and small eyes and what not. It seems that she lives in Texas, America.

Here are the Youtube replies:

… not only Youtube but people on Facebook are becoming aware too.

Thanks to the Internet, the awakening is happening.

How Jews control the minds of little Asian girls

People are beginning to wake up and see the Jewish backed media machine. CNN, Hollywood, majority of western TV shows are owned by Jews, with their own agenda. Jews love promoting Asian female, white male on TV as lovers (also black men, white women)

(It’s interesting to note that a common trope in Hollywood movies is that the white man goes to Asia to kill Asian men and make love to Asian woman; it’s a fantasy trope that played out in real life, starting from the Pacific Rim war)

Note: Woody Allen is a creepy Jew that married his STEP DAUGHTER. Rumor has it that Woody Allen fucked his step daughter when she was a teen.

…

The birth of mongrels (half Asian, half white)

Since little Asian girls are brainwashed to white worship starting from a young age, they’re more inclined to interracial – marriage … but only to whites.

Thus, the self hating Asian woman and the racist white man (white man got conditioned his whole life to become a racial too), thus they make half Asian, half white kids.

Because white genes are recessive and Asian genes being more dominant, half asian, half whites (or hapas, as they’re called) tend to look more ASIAN than white.

The hapa myth: half Asian, half white babies are BEAUTY and they grow up to be beautiful — well, that’s the narrative.

Also, interestingly enough, the narrative in America is that Asian men are small dick nerds.

What happens when an Asian woman have a child with a white man?

Okay — so what happens when you have hapa males? You have this:

(Picture above is half Jew, half Asian; looks like a Mexican to me. Second picture is Elliot Rodger, who is half Chinese, half British)

When you have a racist white dad and a self hating Asian mom, the hapa male tend to be fucked in the head.

Reasons being:

1. He thinks he’s a white man — but he looks Asian. A racist society treats him as an Asian man. He gets no white privilege (ie, Asian women won’t throw themselves at him)

2. He feels like an eternal cuck because his mom is Asian, his dad is white but … he looks like an Asian man? This eternal cucking gnaws at his conscious ever since he gained self aware at 5 years old.

3. He has a half time getting white women AND Asian women, in a racist America.

In conclusion …

Jews are intelligent people who has realized that masses of people are dumb. So they manipulate the masses’s values through their media machine.

Jews begin their conquest with every race. Since this post is focused on Asian women, Jews teach young Asian children to worship whites from a young age.

Who, exactly, are the Jews?

Jews are powerful people; they own America — the banks, the military, the court, the people. Yes, Federal Reserve is owned by Jews.

Even the Presidents have to pay respect to their Jewish Overlords.

To be continued …

Advertisements