A proposal to restrict traffic from Homewood to Penn Hills and change neighborhood names in the western part of the municipality sparked conflict between neighbors this month.

Representatives with the Penn Hills Branch of the NAACP and the Lincoln Park Community Center held a press conference Monday at the Community Center to voice concerns over the proposal.

Both organizations are opposed to changing neighborhood names and changing streets to make access from Homewood to Penn Hills more difficult, as suggested by some residents this month.

Community Center Executive Director Joyce Davis said residents should work together to honor the history of Lincoln Park, and work with neighbors in Homewood.

“We’re not going to fix the problems of our society, particularly violence, by blocking off streets,” Davis said.

The area involved is broken into the neighborhoods of Lincoln Park, Eastwood and other areas without specific names. An area west of Verona Road could be “rebranded” as Blackadore Estates to draw developers into the neighborhood, under a proposal suggested by resident Marcia Cereza this month. The Blackadore family owned farmland in Penn Hills.

Cereza outlined plans at an Oct. 4 meeting that she and her neighbors developed to help reduce crime in areas of West Penn Hills that border Pittsburgh.

Cereza, president of the Penn Hills Zoning Board and a member of the Penn Hills Community Development Corp., proposed organizing block watch efforts, blocking or changing the directions of unspecified streets to restrict traffic coming in from Homewood.

“We need to come together as a community,” Cereza said. “This is a way for us to watch out for each other.”

No formal plans to change street directions or rename neighborhoods have come before the municipality, and the plan is not being handled by the Community Development Corp., said Penn Hills Planning Director Howard Davidson.

About 5,000 Penn Hills residents live west of Verona Road, according to 2010 census data information. Cereza said similar efforts to restrict traffic and establish a block watch on her street have improved quality of life for residents in the past three years.

“I really think this is do-able,” Cereza said. “This is our home, and we have to take it back one street at a time.”

Kelsey Shea is a staff writer for Trib Total Media.