State authorities late Wednesday afternoon rescinded swimming advisories and alerts for nine different beach locations on the Crystal Coast.

The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources says the latest tests shows the water in those nine locations in Carteret County once again meets state and federal standards for swimming.

The state issued the advisories and alerts Tuesday after tests taken Monday show high bacteria levels at the popular beach sites.

DENR still doesn't know what caused the high bacteria levels in so many sites. The last time this many sites were put on advisory or alert status was in 2004.

Previous Story

You might want to watch where you take a tip in the ocean for the next couple of days.

State environmental officials have issued six swimming advisories and three swimming alerts for Carteret County. They found bacteria levels that exceed state and federal recreational water quality standards at those beach locations.

The Department of Environment and Natural Resources says the last time this many advisories were issued at the same time was back in 2004 for the Bogue Banks.

The advisories affect the public beach access at Fort Macon State Park at the end of Picnic Park Drive in Atlantic Beach; the public beach access at the end of Henderson Boulevard in Atlantic Beach; the public beach access at the end of New Bern Street in Atlantic Beach; the public beach access at mile marker 4 ½ off Highway 58 in Atlantic Beach; the public beach access at mile marker 15 off Highway 58 in Emerald Isle; and the public beach access at mile marker 19 ½ at the end of Bogue Inlet Drive adjacent to the ocean pier in Emerald Isle.

The alerts affect the public beach access at Memorial Park near mile marker 6 off Highway 58 in Pine Knoll Shores; the public beach access located half of a mile west of mile marker 10 off Highway 58 in Salter Path; and the public beach access at mile marker 12 off Highway 58 in Indian Beach.

Tests taken Monday show high bacteria levels, and state officials have posted signs warning people of the risks to swim at the locations. DENR says people would experience flu-like symptoms, including throwing up and diarrhea.

The sites will be tested again today and they will update the advisories and alerts when bacteria levels drop to acceptable levels.

DENR says when they have this many advisories they start looking for obvious sources of pollution, but so far there are no reported sewage spills in the area.