''There is a strong nostalgia for the past here, of the heydays of the 20's to 50's when Buffalo was a very wealthy and prosperous city,'' said Robert B. Skerker, the chairman of the Erie County Cultural Resources Advisory Board who has promoted commemoration of the centennial. ''There is a longing to turn the clock back and see what can be learned.''

At the heart of the nostalgia is what some call the McKinley Curse, the aftermath of the assassination of President McKinley on Sept. 6, 1901, at the hands of an anarchist, Leon Czolgosz (pronounced CHOAL-gosh), railing against imperialism. Mr. McKinley had come here to visit the exposition, which was showcasing a relatively new technology, the electric light, and promoting America as the leader of the Western Hemisphere.

Of course, the city's prosperity did not immediately come to a halt with the assassination. Its population peaked in 1950 at 580,000, about twice what it is now. But the ''Pan Am'' or ''Pan,'' as it is commonly known, is something of a fixation here, where nostalgia runs deep and the city's long economic slide is burned into the civic psyche.

So the observances are now being held all around town, including one at the historical society -- housed in the only remaining building from the expo -- that is setting attendance records.

A group in town, the Pan-American Collector's Society, numbering about 70 people, has filled a gallery at the State University at Buffalo with a display of tickets, trinkets, souvenir glassware and other exposition keepsakes passed down from generation to generation, and now actively traded on Internet auction sites. The county bar association plans to re-enact the trial of McKinley's assassin.

One of the city's ubiquitous abandoned grain elevators, the legacy of its once dominant role in shipping goods from the Midwest, will be illuminated two nights a week through September with images from the expo. There has been a parade and dozens of seminars and readings, using the centennial as a theme for looking back and forward.

Whether because of McKinley or, perhaps more rationally, the late 20th-century collapse of the manufacturing industry that had been the city's backbone, hard luck has come in many forms.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

With a 2000 population of 292,648, Buffalo now ranks No. 59 in population, behind places like Mesa City, Ariz., Arlington, Tex., and Fresno, Calif. There were snowstorms, including the infamous 1977 blizzard of 20-foot snowdrifts, that inspired a run of weather jokes by Johnny Carson, and, from 1991 to 1994, the beloved Buffalo Bills lost four straight Super Bowls.

''There are people who seriously believe if McKinley was not shot here, the Bills would have gone on to win four Super Bowls,'' said William Siener, the executive director of the Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society.

Today, sometimes just the name of the city draws a smirk. How it got its name is much disputed, with some historians speculating that buffaloes may indeed have roamed here centuries ago or maybe the name came from a creek whose Indian name, beaver, was mistranslated, or maybe it was in honor of a solitary Indian who lived on that creek.

Whatever the case, Buffalo was not mocked 100 years ago. The exposition's ''Spanish renaissance revival'' buildings, festooned with 8-watt bulbs in what was then one of the most spectacular displays of decorative light ever seen, were torn down afterward, as planned; the site of the expo, formerly a farm, is now a neighborhood of broad streets and pleasant homes and includes the New York State Building, the only permanent structure and now home for the historical society.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The gun used to assassinate McKinley, during a reception at the Temple of Music that housed one of the largest pipe organs ever built in the United States, is in the exhibit, along with a tongue-in-cheek ''What if?'' display speculating on ''Would Buffalo be a different place today or is the long-term impact of the McKinley assassination overrated?'' (One of the possible answers: ''The kick is up. IT'S GOOD. The Bills win the 1991 Super Bowl and add two more Super Bowl victories to their record over the next three years.'')

There are vintage photographs -- including night pictures with the buildings aglow in sparkling light, courtesy of newly built hydroelectric power plants in nearby Niagara Falls -- architectural models and renderings, posters and paintings.

The city's commemoration has not spared the seamier side of the exposition, and not just the assassination.

In another nearby building, the society has also put on display photos and artifacts from the fair's midway, which, along with ''diving elks'' and other carnival attractions, included demeaning and stereotypical exhibits of Indians, Asians, Africans and African-Americans.

A ''scalp dance'' is advertised at the ''Indian theater.'' Visitors could tour a display called the ''Old Plantation, or the South befo' de wah!'' that stood near the re-creation of an African and Philippine village meant to show off ''exotic'' locales.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Siener said the society wrestled with acknowledging the less glorious underside of the exposition but, as an organization devoted to history, it felt compelled to recall the fair, warts and all.

''You are better able to understand the present if you go back and look at some of the threads that brought us here,'' he said.

The idea of commemorating the centennial also caused some discord.

Plans for government-sponsored, large-scale celebrations fell through after a local exploratory committee charged with organizing it presented the projected cost, $50 million, to be paid by the city, county, state and private businesses.

But political leaders balked at the price, leaving it up to individuals and organizations, loosely operating under the umbrella of the historical society, to honor the exposition.

The number of monthly visitors to the historical society has tripled over that of previous years and has been the largest ever recorded, Mr. Siener said.

The look-back has caused a mix of emotions, from how great we were to why can't we do it again.

''Buffalo was once the queen city of the Great Lakes,'' Florence Nicholson, who grew up here but now lives in Virginia, said during a visit to the historical society exhibit. ''I tell my friends that and they say, Buffalo? With all that snow? This was a big place once, and you need to remember that.''

Will Buffalo ever return to its turn-of-the-century glory? Some believe the centennial commemorations may inspire people to build the city back up. But others are not so sure.

''There is a sort of defeatist attitude here that prevents it from ever becoming a big city,'' said Suzette Filipski, who attended college here in the 1980's and who toured the exhibit as part of a visit with family. ''It's always No. 2. Even though it has so many great attributes on its own it never gets respect.

''Here,'' she added, motioning to the displays on the exposition, ''was when it got respect.''