Rashaan Evans Signing Day 2014

Auburn High's Rashaan Evans talks with the media after choosing to commit to Alabama, Wednesday, February 5, 2014, in Auburn, Ala. Vasha Hunt/vhunt@al.com

In the days since publicly choosing Alabama over Auburn, linebacker Rashaan Evans says he has been on the receiving end of negative and hurtful comments from angry Auburn fans both on the web and in person.

After watching his son deal with the public criticism from fans of the team he once played for, Rashaan's father Alan Evans said he and his family have been disappointed with the treatment they've received both on the Internet and in their hometown.

"It's kind of disturbing to know that it's such a thin line between love and hate," Alan said. "A couple weeks ago before he made his decision, Auburn was handing him the keys to the kingdom when they thought he was a lock. Now they want to crucify Rashaan and his family because he wanted to do what he thought was best for him and his future."

Among the most troubling instances of public backlash so far has been directed not simply at Rashaan, but at the family as a whole, Alan Evans said, including their family-owned Corner Market store in Auburn.



"I don't spend time on message boards but I was made aware by some friends of posts on several Auburn message boards calling for a boycott of our business," he said. "It's shocking and hurtful to find out people who used to support us have decided to try and hurt us simply because our son chose to attend a different school than the one they root for."

Evans also said he has heard and disagrees with comments from Auburn fans and recruits saying that fan backlash is a normal part of the recruiting experience.

"I don't agree with the people who say this kind of thing comes with the territory," he said. "I understand that fans say outrageous things to almost every high-profile recruit, but very rarely do they have to endure the things that Rashaan is going through. They aren't just saying negative things to him on Twitter. They are trying to hurt him and his family by having a negative impact on our livelihood.

"I understand that people in this state take football very seriously and that's part of what makes it exciting, but when you start trying to hurt other people because of this game, you need to take a step back and think about what's going on. I guess the thing I would ask most of the people writing these hurtful things is how would you feel if this were your child? Why do you feel the need to heap all this negativity onto a young man who is just beginning his life? I think if people asked themselves those questions, they might think twice before writing some of these things they've written. You can do a lot of harm with the words you put out there and I hope people think about that."

Evans said the silver lining of the situation has been the outpouring of support from the Alabama community.

"I'm so glad that where thousands of Auburn fans have thrown my family away and ridiculed and scandalized our name, called us everything but a child of God, thousands of Alabama fans have embraced us and welcomed us to the Capstone," he said. "They have called us and let us know personally that they stand behind Rashaan and his family and awaiting his arrival to the University of Alabama."