In her post-White House life, Michelle Obama has made a habit lately of surprising people in entertaining ways.

The former first lady's shock-and-awe behavior continued this week, when Obama surprised students from Browning High School students during their visit to the Sidwell Friends School -- where Sasha Obama attends. A week-long cultural exchange program brought the Browning students to Washington, where they were doing a exchange centered around Native life back in their home state of Montana.

Obama was reportedly already on the prestigious school's Washington campus for a meeting with her daughter's counselor, when the head of school asked Michelle Obama if she would come meet the nine visiting students, to which she said yes.

RELATED: Michelle Obama on educating young girls, "Let Girls Learn"



12 PHOTOS Michelle Obama on educating young girls, "Let Girls Learn" See Gallery Michelle Obama on educating young girls, "Let Girls Learn" LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 16: US First Lady Michelle Obama gestures with her hand outstretched as she speaks to students as part of the 'Let Girls Learn Initiative' at the Mulberry School for Girls on June 16, 2015 in London, England. The US First Lady is travelling with her daughters, Malia and Sasha and her mother, Mrs. Marian Robinson, to continue a global tour promoting her 'Let Girls Learn Initiative'. The event at the school was to discuss how the UK and USA are working together to expand girl's education around the world. (Photo by Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images) LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 16: US First Lady Michelle Obama gestures and holds flowers as she is received by young students holding the American flag in the courtyard before an event as part of the 'Let Girls Learn Initiative' at the Mulberry School for Girls on June 16, 2015 in London, England. The US First Lady is travelling with her daughters, Malia and Sasha and her mother, Mrs. Marian Robinson, to continue a global tour promoting her 'Let Girls Learn Initiative'. The event at the school was to discuss how the UK and USA are working together to expand girl's education around the world. (Photo by Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images) US First Lady Michelle Obama (3R) watches an interpretive dance performance during a welcome for her arrival at Mulberry School for Girls during a visit as part of the US government's 'Let Girls Learn' initiative in east London on June 16, 2015. On the first full day of a visit to Britain the US First Lady met with local students in east London and discussed how Britain and the US are working together in order to attempt to expand access to adolescent girls' education around the world. While in London, the First Lady will also host a roundtable meeting on Let Girls Learn, and meet with British Prime Minister Cameron, Samatha Cameron, and Prince Harry. AFP PHOTO / JUSTIN TALLIS (Photo credit should read JUSTIN TALLIS/AFP/Getty Images) LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 16: US First Lady Michelle Obama crosses her hands on her chest as she speaks to students as part of the 'Let Girls Learn Initiative' at the Mulberry School for Girls on June 16, 2015 in London, England. The US First Lady is travelling with her daughters, Malia and Sasha and her mother, Mrs. Marian Robinson, to continue a global tour promoting her 'Let Girls Learn Initiative'. The event at the school was to discuss how the UK and USA are working together to expand girl's education around the world. (Photo by Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images) US First Lady Michelle Obama (C) reacts as she watches an interpretive dance performance during a welcome for her arrival at Mulberry School for Girls during a visit as part of the US government's 'Let Girls Learn' initiative in east London on June 16, 2015. On the first full day of a visit to Britain the US First Lady met with local students in east London and discussed how Britain and the US are working together in order to attempt to expand access to adolescent girls' education around the world. While in London, the First Lady will also host a roundtable meeting on Let Girls Learn, and meet with British Prime Minister Cameron, Samatha Cameron, and Prince Harry. AFP PHOTO / JUSTIN TALLIS (Photo credit should read JUSTIN TALLIS/AFP/Getty Images) LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 16: US First Lady Michelle Obama (C) sits between The UK Department of International Development's Justine Greening and (L) returned Peace Corps Volunteer Bina Contreras (R) during a 'Let Girls Learn' meeting as part of the 'Let Girls Learn Initiative' at the Mulberry School for Girls on June 16, 2015 in London, England. The US First Lady is travelling with her daughters, Malia and Sasha and her mother, Mrs. Marian Robinson, to continue a global tour promoting her 'Let Girls Learn Initiative'. The event at the school was to discuss how the UK and USA are working together to expand girl's education around the world. (Photo by Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images) LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 16: First Lady Michelle Obama arrives at Stanstead airport for a visit to London on June 15, 2015 in London, England. The First Lady is travelling to London with her daughters, Malia and Sasha and her mother, Mrs. Marian Robinson, to continue a global tour promoting her Let Girls Learn Initiative. During the visit she will meet with students at a girl's school to discuss how the UK and U.S. are working together to expand girl's education around the world. (Photo by Dan Kitwood/Getty Images) WASHINGTON, DC - MARCH 03: U.S. First Lady Michelle Obama (R) and President Barack Obama announce a new government-wide coordinated strategy to help millions of girls around the world attend and stay school called 'Let Girls Learn' in the East Room of the White House March 3, 2015 in Washington, DC. Saying that she will focus on this program beyond her time in the White House, Michelle Obama will soon travel to Japan and Cambodia to promoted the new initiative. (Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images) SIEM REAP, CAMBODIA - MARCH 21: First lady Michelle Obama hugs a U.S. Peace Corp volunteer as she leaves the Sofitel Hotel on March 21, 2015 in Siem Reap, Cambodia. Mrs. Obama visited U.S. Peace Corps volunteers as part of a two-nation trip to promote the U.S. government's Let Girls Learn initiative. Cambodia is one of 11 countries where the initiative has been implemented. (Photo by Nicolas Axelrod/Getty Images) (Photo via Plan International) (Photo via Plan International) (Photo via Plan International) Up Next See Gallery Discover More Like This HIDE CAPTION SHOW CAPTION of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE

"We were hurried out to the main campus house and there were secret service everywhere," Amy Andreas, Browning librarian and Human Rights Club adviser Amy Andreas said. "Then boom, in walks Michelle."

The students reportedly snapped some selfies with the former first lady, before the group sat around a table and listened to Obama discuss a world of privilege, and how to succeed despite a lack of resources.

"Mostly what I took away was to ask for things if you want them," senior Dylan RunningCrane said to the Great Falls Tribune. "Kids on the reservation are never taught that. If you want something, you have to ask."

The Browning High School visit to Washington also included tours of the city, a visit to the National Museum of the American Indian and a chat with Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) about Native issues.

"I fell in love with D.C.," senior Mariah Omeasoo said. "It was a definite culture shock because I've lived on the reservation my whole life. There were so many people and so many different languages. I loved how diverse and different people are there than in Montana and on the reservation."

Michelle Obama also recently surprised students at Washington D.C.'s Cardozo Education Campus, treating them to some face time on International Women's Day. Before that, she surprised people recording farewell messages to her on the Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon, popping out from behind a curtain at their most emotional moments.

RELATED: Barack and Michelle Obama through the years

