In this file photo, San Francisco District Attorney George Gascon speaks at a news conference on Tuesday, May 10, 2016. In this file photo, San Francisco District Attorney George Gascon speaks at a news conference on Tuesday, May 10, 2016. Photo: Paul Chinn, The Chronicle Buy photo Photo: Paul Chinn, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 30 Caption Close No charges in 2016 police shooting of unarmed woman driving stolen car 1 / 30 Back to Gallery

San Francisco District Attorney George Gascón declined to file charges Wednesday against a city police officer whose fatal shooting of a car-theft suspect in the Bayview neighborhood in May 2016 prompted the resignation of Police Chief Greg Suhr.

Gascón cited “insufficient evidence” while clearing Sgt. Justin Erb in the death of 29-year-old Jessica Williams, a homeless woman who was unarmed and high on methamphetamine when Erb and a second officer approached her on foot as she sat in a stolen Honda Accord on a dead-end street.

According to a 21-page report by prosecutors, the two officers said Erb shot Williams once in the chest after she tried to drive off, immediately crashed into a truck, backed up and then drove in Erb’s direction.

A federal wrongful-death lawsuit filed by Williams’ mother accused Erb of using excessive force, suggesting he was not directly threatened by Williams or the car. But Gascón said experts who reconstructed the scene placed Erb “within the Honda Accord’s potential path” when he fired on the morning of May 19, 2016.

“All of the available evidence suggests Sergeant Erb faced a volatile and unpredictable situation looking uphill at an approaching car when he fired his gun at Williams,” the district attorney’s office said. “The available evidence does not support the conclusion that Sergeant Erb’s use of deadly force was objectively unreasonable.”

San Francisco Public Defender Jeff Adachi said Wednesday he was outraged by the decision.

“I’m flabbergasted that the DA is saying it is okay to shoot at a person who appears to have been fleeing in a car,” Adachi said in a statement. “How can you justify shooting a person when you easily could have stepped out of the way?”

The shooting happened at time when police leaders and watchdogs in San Francisco sought to stop officers from firing on vehicles and drivers, echoing concerns by the U.S. Department of Justice that the practice endangers bystanders and can lead officers to put themselves in a bad position — one in which they feel they must use their gun.

The city Police Commission has since amended the department’s use-of-force policy to prohibit firing on moving vehicles, except in extraordinary circumstances.

According to Gascón, investigators located only three witnesses to the 9:40 a.m. shooting on secluded Helena Street in the shadow of Interstate 280, including Erb and his partner, Officer Eric Eastlund.

They were conducting an operation to recover boosted cars when they came across the Honda Accord, which had been reported stolen. They parked and approached the car on foot, Erb with his pistol drawn and pointed down. Both were in uniform.

Williams was reclined in the driver’s seat, and when the officers knocked on her window, she “sat up, started the car, and sped off before crashing into a parked utility truck approximately 75 feet away,” the report stated.

Read Full Article