Under the Radar Blog Archives Select Date… January, 2019 December, 2018 November, 2018 October, 2018 September, 2018 August, 2018 July, 2018 June, 2018 May, 2018 April, 2018 March, 2018 February, 2018

Getty New chief named for Justice Department unit probing Trump-Russia ties

A veteran federal prosecutor from Northern Virginia has been tapped to temporarily oversee the Justice Department division handling the ongoing probe into Russia's efforts to influence the 2016 presidential election.

Dana Boente's new assignment as Justice's acting attorney general for national security comes fast on the heels of his most recent high-profile task: serving as the acting deputy attorney general. Rod Rosenstein was sworn in as Justice's No. 2 official on Wednesday, freeing Boente of those responsibilities.

Boente had also unexpectedly became the acting attorney general for a time earlier this year after the holdover Obama appointee was fired by President Donald Trump.

"Dana Boente has been a dedicated public servant for decades and has served in important leadership roles in the Department of Justice,” said Attorney General Jeff Sessions. “In recent months, he has provided extraordinary leadership during the transition period. I am pleased that he has agreed to continue his service by leading our efforts to keep America safe."

Boente will continue to serve as the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, a post to which he was confirmed under President Barack Obama in 2015. The office has jurisdiction over the Pentagon, the CIA and other security agencies in Northern Virginia, so it often handles high-profileespionage, leak and terrorism cases — the same kinds of cases overseen by Justice's National Security Division.

Although well-known and respected in prosecutorial circles, Boente toiled in relative obscurity until late January, when he was abruptly named acting attorney general after Trump fired Obama appointee and deputy attorney general Sally Yates for refusing to defend Trump's first travel ban executive order in court.

In a statement at the time, the White House said Yates' stance "betrayed" the Justice Department. Boente, who has worked for the Justice Department since 1984, said he would defend the order.

The last confirmed head of the National Security Division, John Carlin, resigned last October. He was replaced on an acting basis by his deputy, Mary McCord. McCord announced her resignation earlier this month.