THE owner of a bus which was reported as 'suspicious' rang the police to say he is not a terrorist.

Police visited the bus in Medway Road, Worcester, after a complaint from a concerned resident at 10.30am today (December 28).

The driver left the site at 3.00pm today, four days after he arrived on Christmas Eve.

Ramsay James, 45, who lives in the bus with his wife, son and daughter, was in the area to visit his family in Helford Close.

“I’m not sure what’s suspicious about the bus. I’m in shock that it’s caused such a reaction,” he said.

“It’s that old thing people think you’re a new age traveller and will have drugs and rusty mattresses.

“It’s paranoia since the Criminal Justice Bill came in and anyone in a converted vehicle is labelled a new age traveller who will turn it into a rubbish tip."

Mr James says he has had the bus for two years and it generally receives a positive reception from people.

“Our home has got wheels. We met a few of the neighbours and invited them in. They realise we are all human,” he said.

Mr James, who does miscellaneous building work, says he phoned the police after seeing the Worcester News article to let them know that he is not a terrorist.

When the family are not touring around the country they have a regular spot to park at in Brighton.

Some residents complained about the bus, labelling it an eyesore, but others said they did not have an issue with it.

Mark Sharwood, a local resident, criticised the bus as a ‘blight on the landscape’ and wondered how long it would remain in the layby.

Mr Sharwood says people come and go from the vehicle and questioned if they were travellers.

However others say the new arrivals are friendly and have not caused any problems.

A resident who lives opposite where the bus is parked said: “I don’t think anything untoward is going on.

“I think they are just visiting family. My daughter said it looks like a family man and two small children.

“What matter if they are parking there for a few days? It’s Christmas.

“It could be worse, someone could build houses there. There have not made any noise.”

Another neighbour, who has met the driver, said: “They are visiting family for Christmas. He is a very nice gentleman.

“It is really beautifully done inside. They are not causing problems.”

The police officer who visited the bus said: “We will just keep an eye on it. The vehicle is not registered locally. If it is there any longer we might make further enquiries."

Mr James plans to return again next year to visit his family for Christmas.