Rick wants to fight. Ezekiel wants to fight. Carol wants to fight. Even Morgan wants to fight. All of these people who previously were content to sit back and not battle Negan on The Walking Dead are finally ready to take up arms. And they’ve even found other people (Jadis and the junkyard gang) to take up arms with them, as long as they provide the arms. As we head into the homestretch of season 7, things are no doubt ramping up towards the acclaimed “All Out War” arc from the comics on which the show is based. We checked in with showrunner Scott M. Gimple to ask what to expect in the final three episodes.

“We step on the gas and we do not let our foot off the gas until the end of episode 16,” he says. “Although because I’m working on season 8 now, the foot is on the gas again! I mean, the next three episodes we’re going to shoot you through a lot of big events and things become quantum intense.”

Quantum intense! We’ll take it! But what about that final installment? What can we expect from this year’s season finale? From the sound of it, a whole lot. Gimple teases that the season 7 finale will have many different shades and also notes one big difference from last year’s controversial cliffhanger ending.

“I just think it’s everything,” says Gimple of the finale. “It is everything and the kitchen sink. It is exciting and it’s very emotional and I believe it’s funny in a couple parts, and it builds and builds and builds and it explodes. And though it promises more — because there is a whole lot to get to — there is an ending. It really is just a huge episode inasmuch as it has all of the flavors of this season. It is taking your cup and going down each soda jet and taking a little from each one and then throwing in some hot sauce, a little bit of lime, and then maybe a tiny bit of tequila, as well.”

But will it be a celebratory drink or will we be drowning our sorrows? Knowing this show, it most likely will be a bit of both. The run to the finale begins this Sunday at 9 p.m. on AMC, and for more Walking Dead scoop, follow me on Twitter @DaltonRoss.