Emma Watson joins co-stars at the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Orlando Resort in Florida

Emma Watson took some time away from her studies to enjoy a behind-closed-doors tour of the muc- hyped Wizarding World Of Harry Potter at the Orlando Resort in Florida.

The 20-year-old actress, who plays Hermione Granger in the films, was joined by some of her co-stars, including Robbie Coltrane (Hagrid), Matthew Lewis (Neville Longbottom) and Oliver and James Phelps (Weasley twins Fred and George).

Dressed in a short blue summer dress, Emma, who is currently studying at Brown University in Rhode Island, was given a tour around the $200m stunning attraction ahead of its official opening in June.

Magical: Emma Watson receives her a wand at the iconic Ollivanders wand shop, while visiting The Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Orlando Resort today



Stars of the Harry Potter films including Robbie Coltrane, Matthew Lewis, Emma Watson, and Oliver and James Phelps get a sneak peek tour of the theme park ahead of the official opening on June 18th



MailOnline was invited to join the tour too, which started off by entering the village of Hosmeade before moving on to some the iconic locations made famous by the popular movie series.

This included the Hogwarts castle itself, to the Three Broomsticks pub, the family run Weasley Wizard Wheezes joke shop and Honey Duke's sweet shop.

'I've basically built a film set,' Alan Gilmore, the brain behind the aesthetics of the park and Art Director on several of the films, told MailOnline. 'I believe you could film scenes here if you wanted.'

Watson as Hermione Granger alongside Daniel Racliffe who plays the title role in the movies



Set over 20-acres, rides at theme park include Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey, which will take guests through scenes and rooms from the blockbuster movies with the turreted building made to look 700 feet tall.

Pottermaniacs - paying £50 for a ticket - will enter the 'Wizarding World' through a station archway named after Hogsmeade, the magical village near Hogwarts.



A plume of steam and a train whistle will sound the arrival of the Hogwarts Express.



The roof at Hogwarts stays snowy all year round despite the Orlando heat



Other rides include the 'Dragon Challenge,' a twin high-speed roller coaster themed after the 'Triwizard Tournament'.

There is also be a family roller coaster called 'Flight of the Hippogriff,' named after a creature with an eagle's head and a horse's body.



Every shop and restaurant is Potter-themed. Honeydukes sells chocolate frogs and Bertie Bott's Every-Flavour Beans, Ollivander's peddles magic wands, Zonko's joke shop has Sneakoscopes, and the Three Broomsticks pours Butterbeer.



While wandering the corridors of Hogwarts castle on their way to experience Harry Potter And The Forbidden Journey, guests will pass through Dumbledore's office