FROM powerhouse runs to moments of sheer individual brilliance, we’ve compiled the best tries of 2014.

Watch each of the tries in the video above, then vote for which four-pointer you thought was the best of the season in our poll.

FINALS MVP: WHO’S BOLTED TO THE FRONT?

Round 1

JOSH MANSOUR (Panthers) v Knights

Josh Mansour was a tryscoring sensation this season. Source: Getty Images

This year was a breakout season for Mansour, who finally showed us what all the hype was about. And we didn’t have to wait too long for a taste of what was to come from him as the winger carried three defenders across the line to score a barnstorming try.

Round 3

BRETT MORRIS (Dragons) v Sharks

A routine kick by Gareth Widdop ended in the most spectacular fashion when Morris drew on his superman abilities to leap in the air, take the ball and score — all while he was being bundled over the sideline by a Sharks defender.

Round 5

SEMI RADRADRA (Eels) v Broncos

Semi Radradra beats a Ben Barba tackle to score a magnificent try. Pic: Darren England. Source: News Corp Australia

With the ball in his hands the Semi-trailer only has one gear — full speed ahead.

After taking a pass from Willie Tonga deep in Eels territory, Radradra heads towards the sideline and arrogantly beats Ben Barba’s attempt at stopping him to crash over and score.

Round 6

DANIEL TUPOU (Roosters) v Eels

We all know Tupou can leap but against the Eels he showcased not only some impressive speed but strength to beat four defenders and score. Taking a pass deep in his own half, Tupou creates something from nothing as he charges forward and breaks the Eels defence. He then strides over 80 metres, stepping and fending his way to the tryline.

Round 7

JASON NIGHTINGALE (Dragons) v Warriors

Incredible finish from Jason Nightingale. Source: News Corp Australia

If there is one player who can muster a show-stopping put down it’s Nightingale. After taking a cut-out pass from Michael Witt, the winger decides to beat the approaching defender by leaping over him to score in the corner.

Round 7

BEN BARBA (Broncos) v Knights

Ben Barba on his way to one of his trademark tries. Pic Peter Wallis Source: News Corp Australia

The right side of Brisbane’s attack combine brilliantly to set up Barba for a memorable four-pointer. As he’s taken out of play, Daniel Vidot manages to get a pass away in the nick of time to centre Jack Reed who finds Barba in support.

Round 8

GREG INGLIS (Rabbitohs) v Broncos

Who can forget the moment Inglis powered the length of the field, leaving eight Brisbane defenders in his wake to score a try that is being hailed by pundits as one of the best solo efforts seen in the modern era.

Round 9

JARRYD HAYNE (Eels) v Sharks

Jarryd Hayne scored a selection of incredible tries in 2014. Source: Getty Images

The Hayne plane was in full flight this year and we were all treated to a first class experience as the fullback served up some champagne rugby league. Hayne initiates the play through an inside pass to Willie Tonga who then finds Hayne in support. Hayne takes the ball on the fly and beats three hapless Sharks defenders to score beside the posts.

Round 21

DYLAN WALKER (Rabbitohs) v Knights

Even Chris McQueen would admit there was an element of luck in this try but it doesn’t take away from how good it was to watch. Adam Reynolds grubbers for himself but the ball finds the foot of McQueen who soccers it cross-field into the waiting arms of Dylan Walker.

Round 23

GREG INGLIS (Rabbitohs) v Broncos

The Broncos finished the season sick of the sight of Greg Inglis. Pic: Phil Hillyard Source: News Corp Australia

The flying fullback regathered a chip kick from Adam Reynolds just over the halfway, steamrolled Josh Hoffman before offloading to Sam Burgess. Charging forward, the powerhouse prop then found Inglis in support who dived over to score, sending the crowd into raptures with his ‘lizard’ try celebration.