Alta White is the home whitening for the hygienic benefits that come from whitening your teeth.

A large percentage of the world’s population has stained yellow or dingy looking teeth. Many results of harmful bleaching treatments to obtain a whiter and brighter smile. This can actually harm the surface of your teeth and compromise the enamel.

Alta White is a smile teeth whitening system that you can use anywhere. It is not harmful to your teeth and provides professional results right at home.

Alta White Smile – My Truth Review

Ok, so here goes my Alta White Professional Teeth Whitening review, I have noticed a few exaggerated claims of overnight results about this home teeth whitening kit product. So I thought I'd post my honest review, It is short but to the point so read on and you won’t regret it.

Go To Alta Write Teeth Whitening Official Website

Reasons for Stained Teeth

The things that we eat and drink cause stained teeth. Coffee, tea and dark beverages leave stains behind. The properties in coffee and tea stain clothes and other fabrics.

The same effect occurs when we bathe our teeth in these comforting, delicious beverages. It is ideal to brush your teeth immediately upon finishing a cup of coffee or tea. Even iced tea causes this same effect.

Foods that are high in acid, such as tomatoes and citrus fruits, also damage teeth enamel. The acids break down the enamel, causing it to become soft. This allows for staining and yellowing taking place.

You should not refrain from having a morning cup of orange juice, tea or coffee. Simply step it up a couple of notches with your dental hygiene practices to help your teeth resist further damage from these food and drink items.

Easy Whitening Your Teeth At Home

Without having to spend hundreds or even thousands, of dollars at the dentist, you can achieve the same results at home with the simple Alta White system. Dentist and models approve and endorse this product. Those that have testimonials with the company have actually used the product themselves and had positive results.

Dentists also recommend this treatment system because it has additional dental hygiene benefits. The scrubbing applicator helps scrub the surface of your teeth. This helps break up plaque and tartar that can lead to bacteria buildup in the mouth.

Alta White Ingredients

It's made of different ingredients that would help during the whitening process. Some of the ingredients are Aluminum Trihydroxide and Magnesium.

This formula is known to support get rid of those darkened areas, yellow spots on teeth, as well as stains that can not seem to be removed from teeth by ordinary toothpaste brands.

Real Results and Easy Application

The application process is rather simple. Alta White uses a soft applicator and clear gel to whiten your teeth. When using this system, it is important to brush your teeth thoroughly. Use the full 2 minutes as your dentist has instructed you all your life.

Make sure that you are brushing the whole tooth, including the sides and back of the tooth. Don’t be afraid to brush your gums as this is part of removing plaque, tartar and bacteria.

Once your teeth are clean, snap the swab provided at the color indicator. Use this to clean the surface again. Dip the wet applicator into the gel. Apply the gel over the entire surface area of the teeth. The gel dries on its own and is not harmful to your stomach should some get swallowed.

Read Customer Reviews

This easy system provides results in less than one week. Before using the system for the first time, take a close-up photo of your teeth as a reference.

Continue to take photos every three days to see your progress. The visible results will help return feelings of confidence in your smile and will help boost your overall self-esteem while polishing and protecting your teeth from future staining.