BILL Clinton has revealed his wife Hillary has suffered collapses over “many, many years”.

The Democratic Party was rumoured to be considering replacing Hillary as candidate in the race for the White House after she collapsed from pneumonia at a 9/11 memorial on Sunday. The 68-year-old has insisted she is feeling “so much better” – and is fit for office. But hubby Bill has blown her reassurances out of the water by revealing the “same sort of thing” has happened before. Hillary has since admitted she has had similar episodes “a few times”.

GETTY UNDERMINED: Hillary Clinton won't be happy about husband Bill's admission

“It has occurred a few times” Hillary Clinton Hillary’s bid to be president has been dogged by claims she is sick. Health fears were already sparked when Clinton appeared to suffer a seizure on camera last month. Last week, Hillary was filmed in a four-minute coughing fit and appeared to spit out "green balls" in a campaign speech. Her campaign finally admitted she had been suffering from pneumonia for at least three days before she appeared to faint and was bundled into her motorcade by secret service agents on Sunday.

Hillary spoke out on Monday night – claiming she failed to admit to her failing health as she “didn’t think it was a big deal”. But Bill, 70 – who famously cheated on her with Monica Lewinsky while serving as president – has scuppered any attempt to downplay the incident as a “one-off”. He said: “On more than one occasion, over the last many, many years, the same sort of thing’s happened to her when she got severely dehydrated, and she’s worked like a demon, as you know, as secretary of state, as a senator, and in the year since.”

GETTY CHEERS DEAR: It's almost as if Bill doesn't want her to win

Babes for Trump Here are the hottest photos of Babes For Trump, the sexy fans of Republican candidate Donald Trump 1 / 17 SPLASH Liziane Gutierrez offers free car wash to Trump fans

On Monday night, US time – the early hours of Tuesday morning in the UK – Hillary finally admitted the truth. She said: "I think really only twice that I can recall. “You know, it is something that has occurred a few times over the course of my life. “I’m aware of it and usually can avoid it.”

SG BALLS UP: Hillary coughs up what appears to be green balls

Hillary previously rubbished theories that she is covering up an illness. A right wing commentator produced a photo he claimed showed secret service agents having to help Clinton up some steps in February. Clinton addressed the health rumours on ABC's Jimmy Kimmel Live, insisting: "I'm alive." She even took the bizarre step of opening a jar of pickles to prove her strength.

US Elections 2016 in pictures The top photos following the campaign journey of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump in the US Elections 2016 1 / 57 AFP/Getty Images This combination of file photos shows the silhouettes of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump and Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton

But the Daily Star Online revealed Hillary clinton’s history of health problems date back to at least 1998 – while she was First Lady to her husband Bill. She suffered a large blood clot in her leg which she referred to as the "most significant health scare I've ever had”. Since then she has taken blood thinners – which one veteran doctor has said could be to blame for her recent ailing health. Clinton also suffered a second blood clot in 2009.

In 2012, while serving as secretary of state in Barack Obama’s government she fainted in her home and suffered a concussion. The state department said in a statement the episode was down to a stomach infection. Hillary had to wear glasses after the fall as she developed double vision – with Bill saying it took her six months to fully recovery. Clinton suffered a third blood clot in 2013 which was revealed during a check-up following the concussion. She was hospitalised for several day’s while doctor’s dealt with the health scare. More blood thinners were administered to help her recovery. The presidential candidate told the media in 2014 there were no “lingering effects” from her concussion but admitted “because of the force of the fall, I had some dizziness”.

GETTY ODD COUPLE: Bill's account appears to differ from Hillary's