In the note contained with the package, /u/lifethruthelens was unsure of why I was a Seahawks fan who was living on the east coast. So I figured I'd take this moment to not only tell him why I am, but why this gift means just a little more to me than it may seem.

My mother and my father had separated when I was a kid and my father had two children of his own from a woman he was previously married to. Even though we shared different mothers and they were a bit older than me, they still treated me like their little brother. They taught me how to read and write and more. When they had separated, he had taken his two kids with him out to WA to live with his sister and had left them out there. My brother and I would try to keep in touch on the phone still after this had happened and I guess there's only so much you can talk about on the phone when your kids. So my brother being a little bit older than me started getting into sports sooner than I did. (I was always more of the comic book, video game type.) So one day he started telling me about the football team out there, the Seattle Seahawks.

I didn't really know who they were, but I knew my grandfather watched football out here so I would ask him. He explained to me how the game worked and who the players on the Seahawks were so on and so forth. So from then on, my brother and I had something we would always discuss on the phone. Football and the Seahawks.

Well, I'm 26 now and he's 28, married and has a beautiful daughter, and (almost) every weekend, we still talk on the phone and discuss two things. Football, and the Seattle Seahawks. I had actually moved out to Seattle October of last year, but ended up coming back to the east due to a death in the family and some other things. I'm hoping to possibly make it out that way again next spring/summer though. So not only did you make the 26 year old in me happy and excited to drink some delicious beer out of these beautiful cups, but you made the child in me happy in feeling that he's just a bit closer to someone who always seemed a bit further. Thanks a bunch! GO HAWKS!