Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Could spending too much time on the internet make you ill?

A team of scientists from Swansea University, working with experts from Italy, who have published a new study believe it could – by damaging the body’s immune system.

The study was conducted by Professor Phil Reed and Rebecca Vile from Swansea University alongside Dr Lisa A Osborne from Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University (ABMU) health board and Dr Michela Romano and Professor Roberto Truzoli from the University of Milan and published in the international PLOS One scientific journal.

'May experience reduced immune function'

It evaluated 500 people aged 18 to 101 years old and found those who reported problems with overusing the internet also reported having more cold and flu symptoms than those people who did not report excessive use of the internet.

Around 40% of the sample reported mild or worse levels of internet addiction – a figure which did not differ between men and women.

People with greater levels of internet addiction were found to have around 30% more cold and flu symptoms than those with less problematic internet usage.

Previous research has shown that people who spend more time on the internet experience greater sleep deprivation, have worse eating habits and less healthy diets, engage in less exercise, and also tend to smoke and drink alcohol more.

These behaviours can harm their immune system and increase vulnerability to diseases.

Internet addiction expert Prof Reed said: “We found that the impact of the internet on people’s health was independent of a range of other factors like depression, sleep deprivation, and loneliness, which are associated with high levels of internet use and also with poor health.”

The study suggested that those who are addicted to the internet may suffer from great stress when they are disconnected from the web and this cycle of stress and relief may lead to altered levels of cortisol – a hormone that impacts on the function of our immune systems.

Prof Reed added: “It may also be that those who spend a long time alone on the internet experience reduced immune function as a result of simply not having enough contact with others and their germs.”

'More susceptible to illness'

The study also found that many people reported using the internet on average for six hours a day but a sizeable minority of the sample used it for over 10 hours a day – most often connected with social media sites.

There were also differences in the way in which men and women used the internet.

The study found women used the internet more than their male counterparts for social media and shopping with men reporting more use of the internet than women for gaming and pornography.

Prof Truzoli, from Milan University, added: “It does not seem to matter what you use the internet for – if you use it too much you are more susceptible to illness.

“However the mechanisms responsible for you getting ill may differ depending on how you use the net.”

The findings follow a recent study, also conducted by the same team, which found that individuals with a problematic use of the internet become more “impulsive” after exposure to the web.

The team also found in 2013 excessive internet users could have withdrawal symptoms.