There’s a certain charm to natural living. It’s earthy, spiritual, and ethereal all at once. It’s radiating an appearance of beauty and health lit from within and channeling all aspects of your life. It’s refinement that is simultaneously down to earth and displays heavenly characteristics. The things to gain are savings in health care costs, in better overall health, sound of mind, and the channeling of intention in everyday life. That being said I’ll go over what natural living is and a few tips to implement the benefits into your life.

What is Natural Living?

Living a natural life can seem complicated for some so let’s define the terms separately. Natural meaning in accordance to nature, functioning in a normal way, not artificial or an imitation, being unprocessed or manufactured using only simply processes. Living meaning to pursue positive experiences, leading a certain kind of life, in its natural state or place, journey of human events and their activities. So in its cleanest forms natural living is the art of conducting one’s life in harmony with nature.

There is something of the marvelous in all things of nature. Aristotle

It’s taking into consideration the things we buy, and use, and how they affect others, the environment, the world, the future, and ourselves. It’s seeking healthy and cleaner alternatives to the harmful things we are sold; so that we can have less of a harmful impact and be cleaner and healthier as a result.

Take Care of Your Body. Cleaning and scrubbing your body removes dead skin cells and enhances blood circulation in the body. For the body and skin care products you use make sure to check the label for harmful, irritable toxins that can clog pores, build up dirt and skin cells, or create redness and bumps. Try looking for natural ingredients that are soft and light on the body such as products that contain botanical extracts and essential oils to soothe the skin and nourish the body.

Go for the Fruits, Veggies, and Nuts. Eating predominately these types of foods will cause your skin to clear up, you to gain more overall energy, lose weight, and develop better airways to breathe more efficiently.

Drink predominately Water, and Tea. Water is the most natural and clean drink you can have, but tea is a pretty close second. It has low caffeine levels compared to coffee or soda. In fact soda is really bad for you, due to the insane amount of caffeine, chemicals, and sugars that are mixed in. Opt for tea instead which not only soothes and calms compared to coffee that is known to get people hooked on cycles of anxiety, stress, and sleep loss.

Cook from Scratch. Cooking from scratch is really fun and you have the benefit of knowing everything that goes into making it. Pre-made snacks, and foods are usually considered junk food, or if not are usually full of chemicals. In the end it’s easier to trust something you hand-made and it would be more delicious may I add.

Utilize Essential Oils. Essential oils, being used to make the body smell nice can used to clean the house, added to food for favor, or used to improve health. Essential oils are great to breath in and can create calming moods in people. Go for essential oils that are untainted and are 100% pure and refined. Something that will be on your body, in your home, and in your plate should be pure, and clean. Only apply diluted essential oils to the skin!

Take up DIY projects. Natural Living is actually tons of fun. There are so many products people buy that they can easily make themselves. Not only is the option better for people, and healthier for their families but also it saves tons of money. Simple everyday items like shampoo, bar soap, toothpaste, and cleaners are easy to made and have tons of resources available on how to make them. There are even guides on how to create journals, and clothing. It’s satisfying to know that you are taking the extra steps to avoid using harmful chemicals in your day-to-day life.

Meditation is a beautiful thing to develop a habit of. Doing it for as little as five minutes a day can help increase focus, and create a positive demeanor. Find a nice tune or mediation session track that lasts 5 minutes so you don’t have to track the time. Find a comfortable area to sit or lie down. Sit in the posture you feel best in and allow your mind to focus on your breathing, your body and its sensations. Allow everything else to become blank.

Reduce Waste. Human beings consume too much and waste too much. But reducing waste is a great way to save money and decrease the waste that we are throwing out and its great for the environment as too. Utilize what you already have to the best of your ability and reframe from buying the unnecessary. Not only will your trash volume go down but you will also enjoy less clutter. And with less clutter comes a cleaner state of mind.

Self-Care. Avoid illness and depression with self-care. Everyone needs love especially from ourselves. Get enough sleep so you can be energized and prepared to face the coming day. Nothing destroys a day faster than not getting enough sleep. Learn to love yourself if you don’t feel you’re quite there yet. Focus on your dreams and what makes you great. Take steps toward your dreams to feel self-actualized and fulfilled. We need something to work towards. While on your pursuit of happiness make sure to check on how you’re feeling and how you’re coping. Don’t push yourself too hard. Hold your health and wellbeing as a priority that it should be.

Be Active. Humans were not meant to be sedentary. We were meant to move around and burn calories that we consume. Take advantage of being alive and well and move your body as often as you can. What we do consistently becomes habit, so take the road less traveled and move while you can. Take advantage of your joints, muscles, breathe and body. Stretch them, and move them and your body will reward you with a stronger body that will be capable of taking on even more challenges.

Nature is man’s teacher.

She unfolds her treasure to his search,

unseals his eye, illumes his mind,

and purifies his heart;

an influence breathes from all the sights and sounds

of her existence. Alfred Billings Street

SaveSave