BEST BIZZARO WORLD

Alex Biega made the biggest save of the game.

An Arizona goal was disallowed because of flat-out laziness.

Jannik Hansen scored on a shot that went off two separate Coyotes and in.

McCann was supposed to be scratched, but played due to injury, and set up the biggest goal of the game, the first one.

And without Sutter, Edler and Dorsett, the Canucks won their second straight, and did it on the road, with Ryan Miller in net.

Strange days, indeed. But the most bizarre turn of the day happened hours earlier, buried in a TSN report from Bob McKenzie.

The Canucks apparently haven’t, as of today, received a single call, not one, from another team inquiring about Hamhuis’s availability.

Uh, jaw-meet-floor.

Since training camp, speculation has threaded through the NHL back channels that the Canucks could be willing to deal Hamhuis at the deadline.

The Canucks’ corporate, public line of “we’ll wait to see if we’re in a playoff race before we decide what to do with Hamhuis” has been cycled locally and nationally since the start of December.

Again and again and again.

Heck, even as Hamhuis prepared to come back from injury at the end of January, much of the discussion revolved around other teams watching this guy.

.@TSNBobMcKenzie says NHL teams will be watching Dan Hamhuis' return from injury, just in case he's made available https://t.co/mS6bT9zr2d — TSN Radio Vancouver (@TSN1040) January 29, 2016

All this, and now the Canucks contend not a team has inquired about the former Team Canada defenceman, who would be at the top of the wish list of any contender looking for available blueliners, if he was on the market?

Colour me suspect.

It’s at least possible teams are waiting to see how Hamhuis looks before dipping their toes in the water (yeah, right).

Maybe the Canucks have generated some spin here.

Though, it does the Canucks no favours to pass along the notion that no one is calling for Hamhuis, unless no trade is made.

The only real reason to keep teams from calling is if Hamhuis is letting them know he wouldn’t waive.

But even that hasn’t stopped teams in the past from pressing.

See The Mats Sundin Incident for more on that.

I understand why the Canucks haven’t gone to Hamhuis for a decision on whether he’d waive, and if he would to whom.

But they have to at least be figuring out what the market is, and what they could get for him.

If they’re not doing that, they’re not doing their jobs.

BEST RESPONSE

With Markstrom firing behind him, Ryan Miller had a really good game. He got lucky, too.

Hamhuis blocked a sure goal. Biega made that save. And the Canucks’ video review team had their biggest moment of the season catching that offside.

Still, the Canucks played badly enough to get rolled early. Miller kept them in it. This run of goaltending the Canucks have had in the past six weeks is as good as they’ve got in years.

BEST PASS

That McCann pass to Virtanen, so great.

BEST GIF

The city of Vancouver when Willie scratches McCann three games in a row.

BEST HOPE

BEST UPDATE

JPats and I hooking up for a podcast tomorrow. Send me your topics.

BEST I HOPE FARHAN DOESN’T SEE THIS

BEST PLOT TWIST

“The Canucks have elected to keep Hamhuis, trading Edler instead.”

BEST REALITY

You’re probably right:

BEST WTF

It wasn’t the best game Virtanen has played, but it was another strong one, marked by that snipe of a goal.

He made enough things happen that when it was over, and you see he played just 9:08, you couldn’t believe it.

Virtanen is going to make so much happen with those rushes down the wing. He already does, but just wait a year or two.

I was talking to Dorsett about this the other day.

“He’s got this one play where the D-man is half in, pinching in our end, and (Virtanen) just pops the puck past him and he’s so fast.

“Even if the D clips him on the way by, he’s strong enough to keep his momentum going.”

Plays like that are going to be deadly for opponents to deal with soon enough.

But Virtanen is going to need to play more.

For much of the night, Willie rolled three lines, with Horvat playing 19:34, Vey 18:26 and Henrik 18:18.

This while McCann played just 8:57.

Amazing, really, that Vey ended up with 4:33 in PP time and Henrik 3:30. It worked out that PP2 played more.

Haven’t seen that very often.

BEST SHIFT

Henrik Sedin is playing hurt. It’s been a reality for weeks. It was at the end of December when he didn’t feel comfortable sitting between shifts.

It’s probably going to be his burden for the rest of the season.

I remain convinced it is The (main) Reason Willie won’t play anyone else with the twins but Dransen. I’ll get into that in a bit.

The injury has helped overturn what was one of the most impressive starts Henrik has had to a season, all things considered.

Also the injury, probably, is going to be the biggest factor in the Canucks not making the playoffs.

The tell-tale is always in the face-off circle. When you see Henrik getting sat down in the the dot, again and again, something isn’t right. Tonight, you saw him lose seven in a row.

He does odd things, things that don’t look right. Like this.

But Henrik is doing what all great captains do. He is gutting it out. He is trying to will this group, a mix of rag-tag veterans with promising-but-still-too-green youth, into a post-season spot.

The signature elongated shifts that bow, out and in, as the Sedins work the walls and the front of the net, with grace and nerve, grit and craftsmanship, have become fewer and fewer as this season rolls on.

But tonight, we remembered. Maybe it’s a sign of more good things to come. Maybe.

The Sedins took possession of the puck in the offensive zone with 6:03 left in the second. Hansen and Daniel did most of the work, crushing it along the boards.

They absorbed contact. Moved the puck up and down the wall. It would go that way for 1:16. Like the old days. Except it wasn’t. Henrik touched the puck three times on that shift. Each for just a brief moment.

Watching it, and watching him lately, it sure suggests Henrik can’t work the boards like he does when healthy. It’s why Hansen is so critical to the line right now.

If Henrik can’t cycle like normal, the only guy who can fill that void, on this team anyway, is Hansen.

He was so fun to watch on that shift.

But so was Henrik. Even though he barely touched the puck, he did have the most memorable moment. Just a few ticks before Jannik scored a bank shot off two Coyotes, Henrik curled in front of the net yelling:

“They’re tired, they’re tired.”

It’s great stuff. Fun stuff.

BEST YOU CAN’T MAKE THIS UP

Really?

BEST LOL

BEST JEALOUSY

Edler going to be steamed tonight.

BEST MAKES YOU THINK

BIGGEST SNUB

A few months ago, Brendan Gaunce was a great story.

He dominated the Young Stars tournament. Linden crowned him the tournament’s best player.

Upgrades to his skating bled off the ice. Those improvements helped him in preseason, too, during which his solid, responsible play was mixed with some moments of electricity. And a couple of goals.

For the first time people whispered, would this be the year Gaunce made the Canucks on opening night?

It was not a silly notion.

When Chris Higgins went down with an injury, back when Chris Higgins going down with an injury meant something, many wondered if Gaunce would be the one to replace him.

The head coach suggested it was a pretty good guess.

I think you’re real accurate with that, I think Gaunce has had a great camp, and I think it’s a natural fit, he’s a great penalty killer, he can play in that role, he skates well.

Gaunce would not be deemed worthy, or ready, for an NHL season, however.

He would start, again, in Utica. And everything he has done there since has only emphasized what you saw in that preseason wasn’t a mirage. Gaunce is ready. Or close to it.

In less than half the games he played last year, he has more goals and nearly as many points. He has played right wing, left wing and centre.

He has played them all well. I really don’t get that Kenins has played more NHL games than Gaunce has this year.

It’s not like Gaunce has been entirely ignored. He did get to play a couple of games around Halloween. Scored a goal, too.

I also don’t get why, with Sutter likely gone for the year, it is not Gaunce in the NHL right now. He’s earned his spot. He’s earned some games, too.

With his versatility, you could work him in enough to keep him sharp, and ready for the inevitable injury or two which would get him into the lineup.

He is better than Friesen. He can literally play anywhere too.

To me, the moment Sutter went down, I thought this was Gaunce time.

Guess he’ll have to wait.

BIGGEST SNUB II

The Canucks are big on the NHL experience. Last year, when Corrado was with Vancouver for weeks but not playing, he was “making strides” being around NHL players and practices.

This has not yet been applied to Hunter Shinkaruk, whose breakout year in the AHL has not yet been rewarded with an NHL carrot.

He did get one game where he played with Dorsett and Cracknell, and didn’t play much.

How is he going to take it that another player has been called up ahead of him?

He isn’t a centre? OK.

The Canucks have five healthy ones already. Do they really need another?

No, this won’t go down smoothly.

Maybe Gaunce and Shinkaruk will still get their shot.

You have to believe they will.

Until then though, this is a bitter pill for both.

BEST AIR QUOTES

It was evident today the same unfortunate issues The Province had with Virtanen are not going to be repeated with Horvat.

The Province was all-in on Horvat with several accounts celebrating his play this year, even going so far as to mock any evidence which suggests he hadn’t played nearly as well as it seems during that 15-in-14 run.

Did someone actually air quote Corsi and Fenwick during the discussion to make fun of these stats?

Yes, that happened during one of the daily “60 seconds” videos The Province produces, videos which have become increasingly influential in the local market.

But, come on, if you’re going to go all-in on only old school numbers to determine who is playing well, choosing to ignore mountains of data because it doesn’t fit your storyline, you do have to at least point out his plus-minus, don’t you?

OR, nah?

BEST OK, I’M GOING TO NEED MORE HERE

So many questions.

How often does this happen?

We need so many answers.