By

The olympics opening ceremony can be seen as a summary of the self-image of the hosting nation. For China in 2008, Beijing Olympics was a platform to announce its arrival on the global stage as a massive power to be reckoned with. The ceremony was a projection of its power into the future. The precise sequences involving thousands of people participating and moving to a common rhythm is how the country relates to its own citizens – all serious, controlling, awe-inspiring.

Under Danny Boyle’s direction, the opening ceremony was a celebration of the English spirit, England’s history and its contribution to the world – the industrial revolution, its music, its Literature. It was sprinkled all over with a dash of British humor in just the right measure as not to take away from the seriousness of the event, but enough to warm your heart. It mixed a Mr Bean in the musical performance of Chariots of fire. There was James bond who was shown jumping out of the helicopter with the Queen, and parachuting into the stadium. The performers were all laughing and having a good time.

This is how England sees itself, a proud and self-assured nation with nothing much to prove. A nation proud of its achievements, and proud of its institutions which it exported to the whole world (…through its colonial past, but let the bygones be bygones for now). Imagine putting up a government body (Nation Health services) as a significant part of the celebration, clearly people have faith in public institutions there. The Brits love for Music was apparent in the celebration of the various era’s to the background music of Queen, Beatles, Prodigy, etc. The performers were having a good time, there wasn’t the tightly regimented controlled sequences that one saw in China, but more fun, more celebratory, and more imaginative.

Leading upto the opening ceremony, London’s attitude to hosting the games has been a bit ambivalent because host nations rarely gain commercially from hosting these events, and hosting the games is more about making a political statements on the world stage, neither of which London needs. The $15Bn expense could have been used in more urgent areas given the current economic gloom, and being a thriving democracy that most of the world looks up to, there wasn’t any statement worth making too. But the opening ceremony has washed away all of those doubts, and it was simply a celebration of human spirit – just what it should be, without any other motives.

It may have lacked the awesomeness of China, but did left you feeling warm and light. Overall a great start to the greatest celebration of the Human spirit.