A long-simmering row between Qatar and other Gulf states over its links with the Muslim Brotherhood and the role of its television station, Al-Jazeera, has exploded into the open with an angry shouting match and the withdrawal of ambassadors.

A joint statement by Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain said they were withdrawing ambassadors from the Qatari capital Doha because it had failed to stick to an agreement by the six Gulf states not to interfere in each others’ affairs.

The statement was released after a meeting in Riyadh of foreign ministers of the six Gulf countries - the other two are Kuwait and Oman - broke up in acrimony on Tuesday night, according to reports in the local media.

No details were given but the three states have made no secret of their anger in recent months over Qatar’s refusal to give up its support for the Muslim Brotherhood and its “democratic Islam” project, which they regard as a major threat to their internal security and monarchical political systems.

They are also suspicious of the role Al-Jazeera has played in the Arab Spring. It has given a platform to opposition figures from countries across the region whose own media block them, but it has also been accused of taking a pro-Muslim Brotherhood stance.

Tellingly, the statement complained that Qatar had signed but failed to implement an agreement “not to support any party that threatens the security and stability of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries whether organisations, or individuals, either through direct security work or by political influence, and not to support the hostile media".

Any number of specific incidents could have given rise to the row. The UAE on Monday jailed a Qatari doctor for seven years for supporting al-Islah, an Islamist group banned in the UAE for its alleged links to the Brotherhood.

Saudi Arabia and its allies also believe that Qatar underestimates the role Iran plays in supporting Shia opposition groups in eastern Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. A bomb set off by a militant Shia group on Monday killed three policemen in Bahrain, one an Emirati member of a support force sent in by the UAE and Saudi Arabia to help quell protests against the Bahraini royal family three years ago.

However, there was competition between Qatar, one of the richest countries per head of population in the world, and Saudi Arabia for leadership of Gulf international diplomacy long before the Arab Spring began. Apart from its links to the Brotherhood, many of whose Egyptian leaders have been granted asylum in Qatar since it was driven out of office and banned as a terrorist group by the military-backed coup in Cairo, its attempts to maintain links with Iran have also been deeply opposed by Riyadh.

Qatar has said it “regretted” the decision but would not retaliate. It said it was committed to GCC agreements but admitted to "differences” over unspecified “issues".

David Roberts, author of a recent book on Qatari foreign policy, said that the other Gulf states had previously entertained unrealistic expectations that Qatar’s approach might change when the new ruler, Emir Tamim, came to power last year after the abdication of his father.

“Saudi Arabia and the UAE are in such a security-focused state of mind at the moment that it is the only lens they can see things through," he said. “Qatar’s approach is thus seen as deeply, deeply unhelpful.”

The rift is unlikely to have knock-on effects immediately, despite the importance of the region’s oil and gas supplies.

But it will further undermine the coherence of the support that both Saudi Arabia and Qatar are providing rebels groups in Syria.

Each has supported different rebel militias, and the lack of co-ordination and in-fighting on the ground has frustrated the rebels' western backers.

The US and UK had hoped that the two Gulf powers would more closely align their strategy after Emir Tamim took over, but those hopes look set to be dashed.