Robin van Persie injury concern for Holland as Man United striker winces while he walks down the tunnel at half time against Wales

Robin van Persie seen wincing as he walked down the tunnel

Man United striker suffered potential groin injury in World Cup warmup

Manager Louis van Gaal expects striker to be fit for Spain fixture



MATCH REPORT

Arjen Robben and Jermain Lens scored as Holland beat Wales 2-0.

Robin van Persie must see a doctor to ascertain the extent of a groin injury that forced him to go off with a grimace at half-time of Netherlands’ friendly with Wales in Amsterdam.

It gives Louis van Gaal cause for concern with their World Cup opener against Spain less than ten days away.

The Dutch boss said the problem could have got worse had Van Persie stayed on and added: ‘He has to wait until the doctor sees him. It was better than you don’t risk a bigger injury by playing him in the second as it was not the most important match.



Injury scare: Holland striker Robin van Persie was taken off at half time with a potential groin injury

Assist: Van Persie's first-half shot was parried into the path of Arjen Robben who opened the scoring

Tussle: Van Persie fights for the ball with James Chester of Wales at the Amsterdam Arena

‘It looks slight injury but it is not for nothing that you go off.’

Van Gaal said he ‘hoped’ the Manchester United striker, who was not 100 per cent fit in any case after missing six weeks towards the end of last season with a knee injury, would be fit for the Spain game.

Van Persie tried to play down the scare last night and said: ‘I came off as a precaution. It built up during the came so decided it was sensible to come off.’

Van Persie’s importance to his country was illustrated by the way their attack became blunted in the second half, although his replacement Jeremain Lens did score a tap-in with 14 minutes to go to make the final score 2-0.

Arjen Robben had scored the opener in the first half by converting a rebound from a Van Persie shot.

Wales manager Chris Coleman will be warmed by the way his team, without Gareth Bale, Aaron Ramsey and Ashley Williams, tested the hosts at times and could have given their travelling something to cheer had a couple of openings been finished more accurately.

Much was made in the build-up to this game of Van Gaal’s decision to switch to a 5-3-2 system from Holland’s usual 4-3-3. He trialled it in their previous friendly against Ghana last Saturday prompting Bert van Marwijk, the man who led his nation to the World Cup final four years ago, to question the wisdom of changing tactics so close to the tournament starting.

Decisive: Arjen Robben scored one and made one for Holland in their win against Wales

Number one: Robben celebrates after giving Holland a first-half lead against Wales in Amsterdam

There might be more sniping to come given Van Gaal sprung a surprise by opting for a 4-4-2 diamond formation here. With Robben, Van Persie and Wesley Sneijder purring, as was the case last night, their positioning shouldn’t matter though.

In the 25th minute Robben played a one-two with Sneijder then jinked past Danny Gabbidon only to continue tip-toeing too long so when he fired his shot James Chester was able to clear off the line.

In the 32nd minute he did not wait to pull the trigger. Van Persie beat Chris Gunter on the left and cracked a shot that Hennessey could only divert into the path of Robben who struck instantly.

Van Persie could have made it two soon after but he sliced his effort just wide after being teed up by Daley Blind. It was to be the last act in his game, replaced at half-time by Lens with cameras picking up a wince that will make Dutch fans do just the same.

The Dynamo Kiev forward did add gloss to Holland’s win by slotting in at the far post after a perfect cross from Robben, released by Sneijder, but it is clear any absence of Van Persie will cast a huge shadow.

Coleman said: ‘You never like to lose but I don’t think we could have one much more. We put the effort in and we were up against a really good outfit with a top manager. We showed courage, bravery and stayed strong and we gave them a really good test before they head off to the World Cup.’

Point the way: Luis van Gaal gets his message across to his players during Holland training

Bright hope: Holland will be relying on Van Persie's goals to fire them to success in Brazil