SENIOR Queensland police officials were “filthy” with a Supreme Court ruling in favour of alleged whistleblower Rick Flori’s in 2014, a court has heard.

Flori has been committed to stand trial on misconduct charges after allegedly leaking footage to the media of officers bashing a handcuffed prisoner at a Gold Coast police station in 2012.

A pre-trial hearing at the Southport District Court today heard the Supreme Court ruled in November 2014 evidence gathered following the execution of a search warrant against Flori was inadmissable in a disciplinary hearing.

Shortly after that ruling police launched criminal proceedings against Flori, a move the former police officer argues was motivated by spite.

Flori’s former lawyer Calvin Gnech told the hearing police headquarters was furious with the Supreme Court’s ruling.

“Everyone at that office was filthy at the decision,” Mr Gnech said.

“There was a concern police discipline would fall apart.”

The court heard Mr Gnech also received a phone call from Ethical Standards Command officer David Winter during which Mr Winter had queried whether the police union would continue to fund Flori’s legal fees once criminal proceedings had begun.

Mr Gnech said he warned Mr Winter he was “treading a fine line” before terminating the call.

Flori is seeking a permanent stay on proceedings on the grounds the criminal charges are an “abuse of process” brought about by police “reprisals”.

Mr Winter told the hearing in July he initially recommended disciplinary action against Flori but launched a criminal prosecution following the Supreme Court ruling in order to use the evidence gained via the search warrant.

Judge David Kent said Flori hadn’t proven the criminal prosecution was a vendetta.

He also said Flori had failed to provide evidence Mr Winter attempted to ensure the Queensland Police Union withdrew legal support for Flori beyond Mr Gnech’s recollection of his phone conversation with Mr Winter.

A decision on whether to grant the stay or order the trial to proceed will be made on Friday.

EARLIER

THE pre-trial hearing into a former Gold Coast police officer on misconduct charges is set to resume.

Sergeant Rick Flori is fighting the charge of misconduct in a public office after allegedly leaking CCTV footage of police bashing a handcuffed suspect in 2012.

The hearing, which ran for one day in July, is set to resume at the Southport District Court.

Sgt Flori is seeking to have the charges permanently stayed before a trial starts.

Police Ethical Standards Command officer David Winter was grilled by Sgt Flori on the opening day of the hearing in July.

Acting Inspector Winter told the court after the Supreme Court ruled evidence seized in a raid on Flori’s home could not be used in internal disciplinary proceedings, criminal proceedings had been launched.

Sgt Flori however told the court he believed the prosecution was an “abuse of process” based on police service “reprisals”.

Act Insp Winter rejected a suggestion he had been directed by Assistant Commissioner Clem O’Regan to charge Sgt Flori.