Big changes are afoot in LA. New rivals have come to town, QB Case Keenum is gone, and second-year former first overall pick Jared Goff is now the nailed on starter at QB. Led by the youngest head coach in modern NFL history, 31-year-old former Washington Redskins offensive coordinator Sean McVay, the Rams are looking for a fresh start – and who can blame them after a 4-12 season. But who will lineup for this rejuvenated side? RealSport predicts.

Offense

In 2016, the Rams ranked dead last in the NFL in total offense, over 700 yards fewer than the next placed team. With Keenum gone, Goff more experienced, and a new offensively minded coach in place, it doesn’t take a genius to see that they’re keen to improve. Having also radically altered their receiving corps, who will the Rams look to lineup on offense?

Quarterback: Jared Goff

His rookie year may have been a disappointment, but there were sparks of promise. In McVay, Goff has the best coach possible given his record these past few years with the Redskins. McVay isn’t the only positive change for Goff, however, with former Falcons QB coach Matt LaFleur brought in to reinvigorate this offense, and former Jaguars offensive coordinator Greg Olsen brought in as the new QB coach. And yet, this still isn’t all. The Rams really have thrown everything they can at Goff to get the best out of him, bringing in passing tutors Tom House and Adam Dedeaux (according to The Huddle).

Left Tackle: Andrew Whitworth

Three-time Pro Bowler and former first-team All-Pro tackle Whitworth was brought in this offseason from the Cincinnati Bengals to provide some much needed offensive steel. Giving Goff more protection is exactly what the young QB needs, and there are few better at protecting the blind-side than Whitworth.

Left Guard: Rodger Saffold

Eighth-year starter Saffold has been a perennial figure around the Rams O-line since 2010. With all the changes around this organization and this offense, some stability in the shape of experienced Rams is much needed.

Center: John Sullivan

The ninth year, former Minnesota Viking and Washington Redskins center joins a line that desperately needed a reliable center. Sullivan followed his former offensive coordinator from Washington to the Rams this offseason in free agency. It’s his and his colleagues’ jobs to protect a QB that was sacked 26 times in just seven starts last season (LATimes).

Right Guard: Rob Havenstein

Described by Rams general manager Les Snead as “a very, very, very smart guy”, with the addition of others to this line, namely Whitworth, Havenstein is being moved from right tackle to right guard. The third-year offensive lineman is expected to find the move relatively simple, although you should keep in mind he may need a little time to adjust.

Right Tackle: Jamon Brown

Head coach McVay has been very complimentary about what Brown adds to the Rams. Described as “one of the most athletic players the Rams have drafted since 2013” by RamsWire, McVay is quoted as having said:

When you look at it, Jamon Brown is a guy that’s competed really well. He’s done a nice job competing both at guard and at tackle. We gave him and Greg (Robinson) a chance to compete and really excited to go back and look at the tape. I think what we’ve seen from Jamon, really going back to last week, a lot of encouraging things.

However, Brown starting is no foregone conclusion at this point, and (while Robinson has now left), Andrew Donnal could challenge as well.

Wide Receiver: Robert Woods

A strong backup to Tavon Austin as WR2 and a relatively reliable receiver, Woods signed a five-year, £39 million contract with the Rams this offseason. His best season came back in 2014 when he recorded 699 receiving yards and five touchdowns, since then his progress has stalled and will hope for a fresh start in LA.

Wide Receiver: Tavon Austin

While he enters this season as their first choice receiver, I feel that title may not be set in stone after a failure to progress significantly these past few years. 2016 marked his highest yardage tally with 509, but he only caught 58 of 106 targets, which simply isn’t enough from a WR1. Granted, some of those were down to poor QB play, but not all, and if he’s to continue as their first choice with rookies Cooper Kupp and Josh Reynolds waiting in the wings, as well as the likes of Nelson Spruce who looked promising last offseason before being placed on IR.

Wide Receiver: Cooper Kupp

This position is really a free for all. While I feel Kupp will edge it at this point, as hinted at above this remains very much up for grabs with Reynolds, Spruce, and multiple others piling on the pressure for the starting job.

Tight End: Gerald Everett

While Tyler Higbee remains a possible starter here as well, I find it hard to imagine the Rams not starting this year’s second-round draft pick immediately. According to NFL Network’s Lance Zierlein:

Everett has size, speed and tremendous run-after-catch potential, but it is his willingness and ability to block that separates him from other “matchup” tight ends. Route running is below average, but he should improve with NFL coaching. Everett has the talent to become a very good NFL starter with Pro Bowl potential if he puts it all together

Running Back: Todd Gurley

After a stellar rookie season in which he was named NFL Offensive Rookie of the year, second team All-Pro, and to his first Pro Bowl, 2016 it’s fair to say was a little disappointing. Despite an increase in attempts and games, his production dropped significantly from 1,106 to 885 rushing yards. The Rams will hope for a return to form for the potentially successful back.

Defense The Rams defense in 2016 was their strength. Finishing ninth in the league, incoming defensive coordinator Wade Phillips has plenty to work with in the shape of Aaron Donald and Robert Quinn to name just two. Defensive End: Aaron Donald In three NFL seasons, Donald has managed to become a three-time Pro Bowler, two-time first-team All-Pro, NFL Defensive Rookie of the year, and almost won defensive player of the year in 2016. He's that good. Defensive Tackle: Michael Brockers The five-year starter had a poor 2016 by his standards. Starting 14 games, he managed just 19 tackles and zero sacks. But, after signing a new three-year deal last September, I doubt the Rams will have given up on him, and hopefully, 2017 will see a return to form. Defensive End: Ethan Westbrooks With William Hayes now gone, it's time for Westbrooks to step out of his shadow and become the starter. Mainly used as a backup last season, Westbrook recorded 2.0 sacks and 24 combined tackles in two starts and 14 bench appearances. Outside Linebacker: Connor Barwin This newly acquired former Pro Bowler and second-team All-Pro member had a stand out 2014 campaign but has failed to live up to this level since. I cannot help but feel, however, that if anyone will be able to get the very best out of him - It's Wade Phillips. Inside Linebacker: Alec Ogletree Named second-team All-Pro last season, Ogletree was one of the few Rams who stood out in 2016. His productivity has continued to rise since his entrance to the NFL (barring a shortened 2015 campaign), and he's fast becoming one of the league's best linebackers. Inside Linebacker: Mark Barron Barron has become a consistently productive starter since moving to the Rams in 2014 and moving from safety to linebacker. Having recorded 118 combined tackles last season, he should flourish in Phillip's scheme despite the changes. Outside Linebacker: Robert Quinn This two-time Pro Bowler and former All-Pro defensive end is one of the stars of this Rams defense, and has been for quite some time. Getting the best out of him is vital if they are to improve next season, and while the transition from 4-3 DE to 3-4 OLB may be tricky, Phillips is a master at getting the best from talented edge players. Cornerback: Trumaine Johnson A good corner and a consistent starter these past two years, his production dropped in 2016 compared to the previous year, but to be fair so did most of the team's. Playing under the franchise tag this season, Johnson will be returning to the field as the NFL's 25th ranked corner. Strong Safety: Maurice Alexander The Rams top rated safety and a key component to their improving secondary. According to Rams Wire: Alexander saw 434 snaps in 2015 for the Rams, but this past season he started all year, replacing the departed Rodney McLeod. His coverage was the biggest leap in performance, and he notched two interceptions while allowing no scores when in primary coverage from his safety spot. Alexander only really had one poor game all season, a week 12 outing against the Saints in which he missed three tackles. Free Safety: Lamarcus Joyner Still somewhat of a project, Joyner has been slowly improving the past three years into a capable and reliable DB. While he still needs to work on his run defense, given the lack of an experienced starter at the position he is in pole position to start. Although, he should keep one eye open on rookie John Johnson. Cornerback: EJ Gaines Top of the depth chart but no nailed down starter. After a promising rookie year in 2015, Gaines fell away somewhat last season, recording fewer tackles, half the defended passes and no interceptions. While it cannot be denied a reduction in game time due to an injury is partially to blame, he must return to 2015 form if he is to hold off competition.

Want to share your opinion? Why not write for us?