One of X-Wing’s greatest strengths is that it simply oozes with theme. You’re not pushing little plastic pieces around a table, you’re piloting a starfighter through asteroid fields at blistering speeds.

You’re not rolling 8-sided dice, you’re dodging laser fire or doing your best to blast an enemy ship into flotsam.

Well that’s how I feel anyway. It’s more fun to put yourself into the Star Wars universe.

The possibilities for creating squadrons in X-Wing is (pretty much) endless. We’re going to look at recreating specific battles or thematic squadrons found in the films and Legends.

Battle of Yavin

With the lists below I included every pilot in the game that was present at the battle, as well as the generic pilots that were there.

Every Rebel ship was equipped with Proton Torpedoes to potentially deliver the final blow to the Death Star.

I’m not going to build a full lists here. I’m just going to show you who was there, what droids they had, and potentially thematic Elite Pilot Talents for them. I’m just giving you the building blocks. What you make of them is up to you.

Red Leader: Garven Dreis + R5-K6 + Proton Torpedoes

Red 2: Wedge Antillies + Proton Torpedoes + Marksmanship

Red 3: Biggs Darklighter + Proton Torpedoes

Red 4: Red Squadron Pilot + R2 Astromech + Proton Torpedoes

Red 5: Luke Skywalker + R2-D2 + Proton Torpedoes + Deadeye

Red 6: Jek Porkins + R5-D8 + Proton Torpedoes + Push the Limit

Gold Leader: Dutch Vander +Proton Torpedoes + Ion Cannon Turret

Gold 2: Gold Squadron Pilot + R5 Astromech + Proton Torpedoes + Ion Cannon Turret

That should get you started making a squad themed around the attack on the first Death Star. Make an epic list or try and boil that down to 100 points.

You could also throw in Han Solo to top things off.

Han Solo + Lone Wolf + Millennium Falcon + Chewbacca

Lone wolf is probably a really bad upgrade on Han, but it fits thematically. Or does it?

Black Leader: Darth Vader + Squad Leader or Determination + Tie/X1 + Advanced Targeting Computer

Black 2: Mauler Mithel + Predator or Wingman

Black 3: Backstabber

Black 4: Dark Curse (He’s the best.)

Black Squadron Pilot + Predator (or whatever you like)

The Empire is going to have their work cut out for them in this match up, so throw on some fancy stuff on Vader if you want, like Engine Upgrade or Proton Rockets, though that new Tie X1 title and Advanced Targeting Computer should work wonders.

If you’re looking for special Battle of Yavin scenarios, there’s a few floating around out there online. Here’s a great Trench Run Scenario to try out or inspire you to create your own!

While not always the most competitive, thematic squads tend to feel more fun, like each of your pilots is really counting on each other.

Thematic Squad Articles:

Battle of Endor Rebels

Battle of Endor Imperials