In this week’s prospect update, NCAA prospects have a strong weekend and Kyle Connor lights up the AHL. Let’s take a deeper look at how everyone played this week.

CHL

Jansen Harkins became the all-time leading scorer for the Prince George Cougars over the weekend. Harkins was three points back of former teammate Chase Witala for the lead heading into Saturday’s game against Kamloops. A goal and three assists later, Harkins is now alone at the top. The Cougars sit first place in the BC Division, comfortably holding a playoff spot.

Matteo Gennaro scored his 38th and 39th goals of the season, good for seventh in the WHL in goals. The Hitmen are in a battle for the last wild card spot in the Eastern Conference, leading the Saskatoon Blades by a point at this time.



Michael Spacek did not play this week, as he served an automatic one-game suspension (Rebels played just once this week) following a misconduct on February 26th for a “not so nice” gesture. Spacek and the Rebels will play at home tonight against Saskatoon.

Michael Spacek serving his automatic one game suspension tonight. Took a late game misc. vs. Cgy last Sunday for a "not so nice" gesture — Troy Gillard (@Troy_Gillard) March 5, 2017

Luke Green played twice this week and had a point in each game. Credited with a secondary assist on Friday, Green followed up with his 4th goal of the season on a fantastic individual play. Green is a prime candidate to see some time with the Moose following the end of Sherbrooke’s season on the 18th.



USHL

Mikhail Berdin started back-to-back games on Friday and Saturday and was impressive in both. Berdin stopped 38 of 41 in a 3-1 loss to Lincoln and followed that up by stopping 31 of 33 in an 8-2 win over Des Moines.

NCAA

CJ Franklin recorded a secondary assist this week as Minnesota State beat Alaska two games to none in the first round of WCHA postseason action. Another best-of-three starts this weekend against Michigan Tech.

Tucker Poolman was a dominant force this weekend, helping North Dakota to a pair of wins over Miami University. Poolman had a secondary assist in the first game, and contributed heavily with two goals and two assists the following night. The wins give North Dakota home ice in the NCHC Quarterfinals, beginning this weekend against St. Cloud State.



Erik Foley also contributed in a big way to an opening series win in the Hockey East Tournament, winning two games to none over UMass. Foley recorded a goal and two assists in a 3-0 win and an assist in a 5-1 win to go onto the next round. The Friars take on #12 ranked Notre Dame this weekend in the quarterfinals.



Mason Appleton and Michigan State split their series in Ohio this weekend. Appleton had an assist in the first game and followed up with three assists in a 5-3 loss. Michigan State play their final regular season games this weekend in Minnesota.



Matt Ustaski, still playing on Wisconsin’s top line, intercepted a pass and scored an unassisted goal to open the game on Friday. Wisconsin would go on to win 7-4. Penn State rebounded on Saturday and handed the Badgers a 6-0 loss. Wisconsin play their final regular season games at home this weekend against Ohio State.



Jack Glover was scratched once again this weekend. Glover has not seen game action since February 11th.

Overseas

Pavel Kraskovsky and Lokomotiv won Game 5 of their quarterfinal series and eliminated Dinamo Minsk four to one. Lokomotiv will play CSKA Moskow in the Conference Semifinals beginning tomorrow. Kraskovsky was 9/17 on faceoffs and had two shots on goal in the win.

Sami Niku recorded another secondary assist this week; a great first pass out of the zone to start the rush. JYP play three more games in the regular season before the start of the playoffs.

Jacob Cederholm is still on loan with IK Pantern, now in the playoffs to determine which team(s) will be promoted to the SHL. It is impressive that IK Pantern have a shot at the SHL, considering they were only just promoted to HockeyAllsvenskan back in 2015-16 after promotion from HockeyEttan (Division 1/3rd Tier).

AHL

The Manitoba Moose continued to find success this week with a record of 2-1-1-0. With the help of AHL Player of the Week Kyle Connor, the Moose won both games in Rockford with identical 5-3 scores. Jamie Phillips recorded his first AHL win on Tuesday, stopping 32 of 35.

Connor scored the first two goals of the game on Friday en route to the second 5-3 win. This time, Eric Comrie was in net, who stopped 38 of 41 shots. Kyle Connor was the 1st star of the game, and his former Michigan linemate Tyler Motte earned 2nd star with a goal and an assist for Rockford.

You might be thinking, where could Kyle Connor go from here. Scoring the first two goals of the game again? Sure! Connor scored near the end of the 1st period and six minutes into the 3rd period to give the Moose a 2-0 lead. Unfortunately, the game got away from the Moose and they lost eight seconds into overtime.

The Moose finished the week with a 5-4 regulation loss in Chicago against the Wolves. Down three goals in the 3rd period, Brendan Lemieux and Kyle Connor scored under a minute apart to make the game interesting. That was as close as the Moose would come to tying the game.

All stats current as of this morning. Until next time, keep fit and have fun.

Be sure to visit jetsprospects.ca and check out stats and prospect profiles dating back to 2011.