We begin with Fluttershy singing her song,



"Hellfire" she sings... am I getting that wrong?



Anyway, she soon jumps backwards in fright,



As she comes face to face with a parasprite.



An adorable creature, colored sky blue,



And a bucket of apples it quickly eats through.



The creature finds itself being rather adored,



Something rather put off by an ominous chord.



We switch to the library where Spike is cleaning,



With Twilight all huffy and slightly demeaning.



She leaves him to go and check on the crowd,



Each working quite hard to make their princess proud.



Correcting a mare pair she heads to Pinkie's place,



Where she finds the pink pony just stuffing her face.



Flutters slides in with her partner in tow,



Though there are two now more than moments ago!



Twilight decides she wants one of her own,



While Pinkie leaves both to look for a trombone.



To Rainbow Rarity applies her technique,



When Twilight comes waltzing into the boutique.



They all hear a noise and her mane goes all rippled,



As they soon discover the sprite has now tripled.



They each take their own and then proceed to fawn,



And Twi goes on home to sleep until the dawn.



She wakes to the noise of thousands of bugs,



And they start to mess up her shelving, the thugs!



Rainbow wakes to a chirping multitude,



Each quite enamored with their servitude.



She tries to shake them but they will not stop,



As they form a bikini with bottom and top!



Back down on the ground Rarity soon finds,



She doesn't like dealing with their icky kinds.



She meets up with Twilight, their plans now awry,



As they go to up check on poor Fluttershy.



Her cottage a wreck, now filled to the brim,



Position now desperate, and rather quite grim.



Twilight freaks out, but her fears do allay,



As she catches sight of her pal AJ.



They corral the critters up into a ball,



Though I've never seen a Katamari so small!



They soon push the ball a moderate distance,



No thanks to Pinkie's unhelpful assistance.



But in Fluttershy's cottage one has multiplied,



So a colored tornado RD does provide.



She sucks up the chirping, multicolored mass,



When she is assaulted by two disks of brass!



The sprites then descend upon all town,



While they then berate and tear poor Pinkie down.



The town is a warzone, so Twilight does cast,



And it seems they've achieved a ceasefire at last.



A sprite then decides to chow down on a sign,



On non-living matter the insects do dine.



The six then try to keep the buggers at bay,



And Twi runs to me to try to save the day.



Thinking nothing could be done when they ran amok,



I simply told Twilight she was out of luck.



Looking at the town Twilight's brain then addles,



As she drops a reference to Blazing Saddles.



All hope does seem lost when they then hear a tune,



As Pinkie is there, missing but a bassoon.



She plays for the sprites with quite the expression,



And the bugs follow her in bouncy procession.



Celestia arrives while Pinkie strides by,



Leaving a confused look in our Princess' eye.



She says that the welcome she cannot attend,



For with a pest problem she now must contend.



The others are pleased and Pinkie Pie is praised,



That she knew the secret has them quite amazed.



Time for fixing the village they now must devote,



As the episode ends on a rather low note.