I know many, if not all, of the articles here on ROK are original pieces of work. However, I read this article and feel compelled to share it with you for there is an important lesson here that EVERY man (and woman) must know and understand. And that lesson is:

Feminism and feminists will lose in the end.

I say this not out of idealism, wishful thinking, hope or what I’d like to see happen. But rather a cold, clinical, unemotional statement of truth. Feminism and feminists WILL lose in the end. And the reason for this is that the entire movement is antithetical to their human and genetic programming.

Take this excerpt from the article that quotes what is arguably the epitome and most ardent type of feminist—the 1960/70’s feminist:

I’ve known women who fell for this creed in their youth who now, in their fifties and sixties, cry themselves to sleep decades of countless nights grieving for the children they’ll never have and the ones they coldly murdered because they were protecting the empty loveless futures they now live with no way of going back. “Where are my children? Where are my grandchildren?” they cry to me. “Your sister’s books destroyed my sister’s life!” I’ve heard numerous times. “She was happily married with four kids and after she read those books, walked out on a bewildered man and didn’t look back.” The man fell into despairing rack and ruin. The children were stunted, set off their tracks, deeply harmed; the family profoundly dislocated and there was “no putting Humpty-Dumpty together again.” Loading...

This is not a one off anecdote. This is the consequence of putting a childish and evil ideology, as well as your egotistical self, ahead and above all other people. Your career is more important than your children. Your PhD is more important than your husband. Your book is more important than your family. And your activism is more important than your friends. Sadly, all of those things cannot replace the most dynamic, intelligent, interesting, engaging and rewarding thing on this planet, and that is other human beings.

However, what is truly the juiciest morsel of revenge is that feminists and marxists do this to themselves. They have the same single shot on this planet as anyone else, which really is EVERYTHING a human has, and they piss it away on a religion that is nothing more than an excuse to be a narcissistic, self-absorbed psychopath.

Mocking them for dying alone with their cats really isn’t a cliche or a lack of genuine criticism. It’s 100% fact. And it’s a fact they should be constantly reminded of as the rest of us enjoy our lives and the loving people therein.

Read More: Decreasing Marriage Rate Is Hurting Feminism